[Congressional Bills 103th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]
[S. 2296 Placed on Calendar Senate (PCS)]

 Calendar No. 525

103d CONGRESS

 2d Session

 S. 2296

 [Report No. 103-317]

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To ensure individual and family security through health care coverage 
 for all Americans in a manner that contains the rate of growth in 
health care costs and promotes responsible health insurance practices, 
to promote choice in health care, and to ensure and protect the health 
 care of all Americans.

_______________________________________________________________________

 July 19 (legislative day, July 11), 1994

 Placed on the calendar

 Calendar No. 525
103d CONGRESS
 2d Session
 S. 2296

 [Report No. 103-317]

 To ensure individual and family security through health care coverage 
 for all Americans in a manner that contains the rate of growth in 
health care costs and promotes responsible health insurance practices, 
to promote choice in health care, and to ensure and protect the health 
 care of all Americans.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 July 19 (legislative day, July 11), 1994

Mr. Kennedy, from the Committee on Labor and Human Resources, reported 
 the following original bill; which was read twice and placed on the 
 calendar

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To ensure individual and family security through health care coverage 
 for all Americans in a manner that contains the rate of growth in 
health care costs and promotes responsible health insurance practices, 
to promote choice in health care, and to ensure and protect the health 
 care of all Americans.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Health Security Act''.

SEC. 2. FINDINGS.

 The Congress finds as follows:
 (1) Under the current health care system in the United 
 States--
 (A) individuals risk losing their health care 
 coverage when they move, when they lose or change jobs, 
 when they become seriously ill, or when the coverage 
 becomes unaffordable;
 (B) continued escalation of health care costs 
 threatens the economy of the United States, undermines 
 the international competitiveness of the Nation, and 
 strains Federal, State, and local budgets;
 (C) an excessive burden of forms, paperwork, and 
 bureaucratic procedures confuses consumers and 
 overwhelms health care providers;
 (D) fraud and abuse sap the strength of the health 
 care system; and
 (E) health care is a critical part of the economy 
 of the United States and interstate commerce, consumes 
 a significant percentage of public and private 
 spending, and affects all industries and individuals in 
 the United States.
 (2) Under any reform of the health care system--
 (A) health insurance and high quality health care 
 should be secure, uninterrupted, and affordable for all 
 individuals in the United States;
 (B) comprehensive health care benefits that meet 
 the full range of health needs, including primary, 
 preventive, and specialized care, should be available 
 to all individuals in the United States;
 (C) the current high quality of health care in the 
 United States should be maintained;
 (D) individuals in the United States should be 
 afforded a meaningful opportunity to choose among a 
 range of health plans, health care providers, and 
 treatments;
 (E) regulatory and administrative burdens should be 
 reduced;
 (F) the rapidly escalating costs of health care 
 should be contained without sacrificing high quality or 
 impeding technological improvements;
 (G) competition in the health care industry should 
 ensure that health plans and health care providers are 
 efficient and charge reasonable prices;
 (H) a partnership between the Federal Government 
 and each State should allow the State and its local 
 communities to design an effective, high-quality system 
 of care that serves the residents of the State;
 (I) all individuals should have a responsibility to 
 pay their fair share of the costs of health care 
 coverage;
 (J) a health care system should build on the 
 strength of the employment-based coverage arrangements 
 that now exist in the United States;
 (K) the penalties for fraud and abuse should be 
 swift and severe; and
 (L) an individual's medical information should 
 remain confidential and should be protected from 
 unauthorized disclosure and use.

SEC. 3. PURPOSES.

 The purposes of this Act are as follows:
 (1) To guarantee comprehensive and secure health care 
 coverage.
 (2) To simplify the health care system for consumers and 
 health care professionals.
 (3) To control the cost of health care for employers, 
 employees, and others who pay for health care coverage.
 (4) To promote individual choice among health plans and 
 health care providers.
 (5) To ensure high quality health care.
 (6) To encourage all individuals to take responsibility for 
 their health care coverage.

 TITLE I--HEALTH CARE SECURITY

 Subtitle A--Universal Coverage and Individual Responsibility

 Part 1--Universal Coverage

Sec. 1001. Entitlement to health benefits.
Sec. 1002. Individual responsibilities.
Sec. 1003. Protection of consumer choice.
Sec. 1004. Health plan principles.
Sec. 1005. Applicable health plan providing coverage.
Sec. 1006. Treatment of other nonimmigrants.
Sec. 1007. Effective date of entitlement.
 Part 2--Treatment of Families and Special Rules

Sec. 1011. General rule of enrollment of family in same health plan.
Sec. 1012. Treatment of certain families.
Sec. 1013. Multiple employment situations.
Sec. 1014. Treatment of residents of States with Statewide single-payer 
 systems.
 Subtitle B--Benefits

 Part 1--Comprehensive Benefit Package

Sec. 1101. Provision of comprehensive benefits by plans.
Sec. 1102. Hospital services.
Sec. 1103. Services of health professionals.
Sec. 1104. Emergency and ambulatory medical and surgical services.
Sec. 1105. Clinical preventive services.
Sec. 1106. Mental illness and substance abuse services.
Sec. 1107. Family planning services and services for pregnant women.
Sec. 1108. Hospice care.
Sec. 1109. Home health care.
Sec. 1110. Extended care services.
Sec. 1111. Ambulance services.
Sec. 1112. Outpatient laboratory, radiology, and diagnostic services.
Sec. 1113. Outpatient prescription drugs and biologicals.
Sec. 1114. Outpatient rehabilitation services.
Sec. 1115. Durable medical equipment, prosthetic devices, orthotics, 
 and prosthetics.
Sec. 1116. Vision care.
Sec. 1117. Hearing aids for children.
Sec. 1118. Dental care.
Sec. 1119. Investigational treatments.
Sec. 1120. Optional services.
 Part 2--Cost Sharing

Sec. 1131. Cost sharing.
Sec. 1132. Lower cost sharing.
Sec. 1133. Higher cost sharing.
Sec. 1134. Combination cost sharing.
Sec. 1135. Indexing dollar amounts relating to cost sharing.
 Part 3--Exclusions

Sec. 1141. Exclusions.
 Part 4--Role of the National Health Board

Sec. 1151. Definition of benefits.
Sec. 1152. Acceleration of expanded benefits.
Sec. 1153. Authority with respect to clinical preventive services.
Sec. 1154. Establishment of standards regarding medical necessity.
Sec. 1155. Balance billing.
 Part 5--Additional Provisions Relating to Health Care Providers

Sec. 1161. Override of restrictive State practice laws.
Sec. 1162. Provision of items or services contrary to religious belief 
 or moral conviction.
Sec. 1163. Duty to disclose incorrect test results.
 Subtitle C--State Responsibilities

Sec. 1200. Participating State.
 Part 1--General State Responsibilities

Sec. 1201. General State responsibilities.
Sec. 1202. Assuring community-rated premiums through establishment of 
 health care coverage areas.
Sec. 1203. Use of incentives.
Sec. 1204. Restrictions on funding of additional benefits.
Sec. 1205. Consumer information and marketing.
Sec. 1206. State responsibilities with respect to worksite health 
 promotion discounts.
Sec. 1207. Consumer advocate.
Sec. 1208. Election procedure for community-rated employers.
Sec. 1209. Coordinated health care services for children.
Sec. 1210. State responsibilities for utilization management.
Sec. 1211. Assuring family choice of health plans.
Sec. 1212. Oversight of health plan enrollment activities.
Sec. 1213. Administrative allowance percentage.
 Part 2--Requirements for State Single-payer Systems

Sec. 1221. Single-payer system described.
Sec. 1222. General requirements for single-payer systems.
Sec. 1223. Special rules for States operating Statewide single-payer 
 systems.
Sec. 1224. Special rules for health care coverage area-specific single-
 payer systems.
 Part 3--Reductions in Cost Sharing and Premiums

Sec. 1281. Reduction in cost sharing for low-income families.
Sec. 1282. Application process for cost-sharing reductions and premium 
 discounts.
Sec. 1283. End-of-year reconciliation.
Sec. 1284. Eligibility error rates.
 Subtitle D--Consumer Purchasing Cooperatives

 Part 1--General Requirements

Sec. 1301. Designation and organization of cooperatives.
Sec. 1302. Agreements with health plans.
Sec. 1303. Agreements with community-rated employers.
Sec. 1304. Enrolling individuals in health plans through a cooperative.
Sec. 1305. Cooperative fee.
Sec. 1306. Coordination among cooperatives.
Sec. 1307. Third-party contracting to perform duties.
 Part 2--Access to Health Plans Sponsored by FEHBP

Sec. 1321. Designation of FEHBP as a consumer purchasing cooperative.
Sec. 1322. Special rules for FEHBP supplemental plans.
 Subtitle E--Employer Purchasers

 Part 1--Definitions and Responsibilities of Employer Purchasers

Sec. 1401. Definitions.
Sec. 1402. Election of large group purchasers.
Sec. 1403. Employee enrollment requirements.
Sec. 1404. Responsibilities and authority of employer purchasers.
Sec. 1405. Development of large employer group purchasers.
Sec. 1406. Timing and termination of employee elections.
Part 2--Requirements for Health Plans Offered by Large Group Purchasers

Sec. 1411. Establishment of standards applicable to employer sponsored 
 plans.
Sec. 1412. Corrective actions for larger employer group health plans.
Sec. 1413. Disclosure and reserve requirements for large employer 
 sponsored health plans.
Sec. 1414. Trusteeship by the Secretary of insolvent large employer 
 sponsored health plans.
Sec. 1415. Assistance for low-wage families.
 Subtitle F--Health Plans

Sec. 1500. Health plan defined.
 Part 1--Requirements for Health Plans

Sec. 1501. Certified health plan.
Sec. 1502. Application of requirements.
Sec. 1503. Establishment of standards.
Sec. 1504. Certification and revocation of health plan certification.
Sec. 1505. Monitoring.
Sec. 1506. Association health plans.
Sec. 1507. Specified standard benefits; supplemental benefits and cost-
 sharing policies.
Sec. 1508. Collection, provision of standardized information, and 
 confidentiality.
Sec. 1509. Prohibition of discrimination.
Sec. 1510. Quality assurance standards.
Sec. 1511. Community-rating.
Sec. 1512. Financial solvency requirements and consumer protection 
 against provider claims.
Sec. 1513. Grievance mechanisms.
Sec. 1514. Access to care.
Sec. 1515. Information and marketing standards.
Sec. 1516. Enrollment; availability, and renewability. 
Sec. 1517. Administrative provisions.
Sec. 1518. Information regarding a patient's right to self-
 determination in health care services.
Sec. 1519. Rural and medically underserved areas.
Sec. 1520. Payment adjustments.
Sec. 1521. Preemption of certain State laws relating to health plans.
Sec. 1522. Contracts with consumer purchasing cooperatives.
Sec. 1523. Health plan arrangements with providers.
Sec. 1524. Health security cards.
Sec. 1525. Utilization management protocols and physician incentive 
 plans.
 Part 2--Requirements Relating to Essential Community Providers

Sec. 1531. Health plan requirement.
Sec. 1532. Recommendation on continuation of requirement.
 Subtitle G--Federal Responsibilities

 subpart a--establishment of national health board
Sec. 1601. Creation of National Health Board; membership.
Sec. 1602. Qualifications of Board members.
Sec. 1603. General duties and responsibilities.
Sec. 1604. Annual report.
Sec. 1605. Powers.
Ssubpart b--responsibilities relating to review and approval of state 
 systems
Sec. 1611. Federal review and action on State systems.
Sec. 1612. Failure of participating States to meet conditions for 
 compliance.
Sec. 1613. Reduction in payments for health programs by Secretary of 
 Health and Human Services.
Sec. 1614. Review of Federal determinations.
Sec. 161subpart c--responsibilities in absence of state systems
Sec. 1621. Application of subpart.
Sec. 1622. Federal assumption of responsibilities in non-participating 
 States.
Sec. 1623. Imposition of surcharge on premiums under federally-operated 
 system.
Sec.subpart d--establishment of class factors for charging premiums
Ssubpart e--risk adjustment and reinsurance methodology for payment of 
 plans
Sec. 1641. Development of a risk adjustment and reinsurance 
 methodology.
Sec. 1642. Incentives to enroll disadvantaged groups.
Sec. 1643. Research and demonstrations.
Sec. 1644subpart f--responsibilities for financial requirements
Sec. 1651. Capital standards for community-rated plans.
Sec. 1652. Standard forsubpart g--open enrollment
Sec. 1660. Periods of authorized changes in enrollment.
Sec. 1661. Distribution of comparative information.
 Part 2--Responsisubpart a--general responsibilitiesd Human Services
Sec. 1671. General responsibilities of Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services.
Sec. 1672. Medical technology impact study.
Sec. 1673. Assistance with family collections.
Sec. 1674. Advisory opinions.
Sec. 16subpart b--certification of essential community providers
Sec. 1681. Certification.
Sec. 1682. Categories of providers automatically certified.
Sec. 1683. Standards for additional providers.
Sec. 1684. Certification process; review; termination of 
 certifications.
Sec. 1685. Notification of participating States.
Sec. 1686. Definisubpart c--workplace wellness programs
Sec. 1687. Workplace wellness program.
Sec. 1688. Wellness discount methodology.
 Part 3--Specific Responsibilities of Secretary of Labor.

Sec. 1691. Responsibilities of Secretary of Labor.
Sec. 1692. Assistance with employer collections.
Sec. 1693. Penalties for failure of large employers to meet 
 requirements.
Sec. 1694. Applicability of ERISA enforcement mechanisms for 
 enforcement of certain requirements.
 Part 4--Collective Bargaining Dispute Resolution

Sec. 1695. Findings and purpose.
Sec. 1696. Application limited to transition period.
Sec. 1697. Request for appointment of board of inquiry.
Sec. 1698. Appointment of board of inquiry.
Sec. 1699. Public factfinding.
Sec. 1699A. Compensation of members of boards of inquiry.
Sec. 1699B. Maintenance of status quo.
 Subtitle H--Miscellaneous Employer Requirements

Sec. 1701. Auditing of records.
Sec. 1702. Prohibition of certain employer discrimination.
Sec. 1703. Evasion of obligations.
Sec. 1704. Prohibition on self-funding of cost sharing benefits.
Sec. 1705. Employer retiree obligation.
Sec. 1706. Rules governing litigation involving retiree health 
 benefits.
Sec. 1707. Participation in FEHBP.
Sec. 1708. Enforcement.
 Subtitle I--General Definitions; Miscellaneous Provisions

 Part 1--General Definitions

Sec. 1901. Definitions relating to employment and income.
Sec. 1902. Other general definitions.
Sec. 1903. Reference to certain terms.
 Part 2--Miscellaneous Provisions

Sec. 1911. Use of interim, final regulations.
Sec. 1912. Neutrality concerning union organizing.
Sec. 1913. Social Security Act references.
Sec. 1914. Antidiscrimination.
Sec. 1915. Coverage of benefits under Health Security Act.
Sec. 1916. Government required data.
Sec. 1917. Sense of the Committee concerning funding sources.
Sec. 1918. Sense of the Committee concerning medical savings accounts.

 Subtitle A--Universal Coverage and Individual Responsibility

 PART 1--UNIVERSAL COVERAGE

SEC. 1001. ENTITLEMENT TO HEALTH BENEFITS.

 (a) In General.--In accordance with this part, each eligible 
individual is entitled to the comprehensive benefit package under 
subtitle B through the applicable health plan in which the individual 
is enrolled consistent with this title.
 (b) Health Security Card.--Each eligible individual is entitled to 
a health security card to be issued in accordance with this Act.
 (c) Eligible Individual Defined.--In this Act, the term ``eligible 
individual'' means an individual who is residing in the United States 
and who is--
 (1)(A) a citizen or national of the United States;
 (B) a citizen of another country legally residing in the 
 United States (as defined in section 1902(6)); or
 (C) a long-term nonimmigrant (as defined in section 
 1902(27)); and
 (2) not an exempt individual (as defined in section 
 1902(18)).
 (d) Treatment of Medicare-Eligible Individuals.--Subject to section 
1012(a), a medicare-eligible individual is entitled to health benefits 
under the medicare program instead of the entitlement under subsection 
(a).
 (e) Treatment of Prisoners.--A prisoner (as defined in section 
1902(37)) is entitled to health care services provided by the authority 
responsible for the prisoner instead of the entitlement under 
subsection (a).

SEC. 1002. INDIVIDUAL RESPONSIBILITIES.

 (a) In General.--In accordance with this Act, each eligible 
individual (other than a medicare-eligible individual)--
 (1) must enroll in an applicable health plan for the 
 individual, and
 (2) must pay any premium required, consistent with this 
 Act, with respect to such enrollment.
 (b) Limitation on Disenrollment.--No eligible individual shall be 
disenrolled from an applicable health plan until the individual--
 (1) is enrolled under another applicable health plan, or
 (2) becomes a medicare-eligible individual.

SEC. 1003. PROTECTION OF CONSUMER CHOICE.

 Nothing in this Act shall be construed as prohibiting the 
following:
 (1) An individual from purchasing any health care services.
 (2) An individual from purchasing supplemental insurance 
 (offered consistent with this Act) to cover health care 
 services not included within the comprehensive benefit package.
 (3) An individual who is not an eligible individual from 
 purchasing health insurance.
 (4) Employers from providing coverage for benefits in 
 addition to the comprehensive benefit package (subject to part 
 2 of subtitle E).
 (5) An individual from obtaining (at the expense of such 
 individual) health care from any health care provider of such 
 individual's choice.

SEC. 1004. HEALTH PLAN PRINCIPLES.

 In accordance with this Act, the following principles shall apply 
to all health plans:
 (1) No health plan may discriminate on the basis of medical 
 history, pre-existing medical conditions, or genetic 
 predisposition to medical conditions.
 (2) A health plan--
 (A) shall offer an annual open enrollment period 
 and accept all eligible individuals for coverage;
 (B) shall not impose a rider that serves to exclude 
 coverage to an individual; and
 (C) shall not impose waiting periods before 
 coverage begins.
 (3) A health plan shall ensure that all medically necessary 
 or appropriate services, as defined in the benefits package, 
 are provided, including access to specialty care.
 (4) Health benefits coverage shall be portable from one 
 health plan to another.
Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to relieve a health 
plan of any obligation or requirement imposed under this Act.

SEC. 1005. APPLICABLE HEALTH PLAN PROVIDING COVERAGE.

 (a) Specification of Applicable Health Plan.--Except as otherwise 
provided:
 (1) General rule: community-rated health plans.--The 
 applicable health plan for a family is a community-rated health 
 plan for the health care coverage area in which the family 
 resides.
 (2) Experience-rated health plans.--In the case of a family 
 member that is eligible to enroll in an experienced-rated 
 health plan under subtitle B, the applicable health plan for 
 the family is such an experienced-rated health plan.
 (b) Choice of Plans for Certain Groups.--
 (1) Military personnel and families.--For military 
 personnel and families who elect a Uniformed Services Health 
 Plan of the Department of Defense under section 1073a(d) of 
 title 10, United States Code, as inserted by section 8001(a) of 
 this Act, that plan shall be the applicable health plan.
 (2) Veterans.--For veterans and families who elect to 
 enroll in a veterans health plan under section 1801 of title 
 38, United States Code, as inserted by section 8101(a) of this 
 Act, that plan shall be the applicable health plan.
 (3) American Indians.--For those individuals who are 
 eligible to enroll, and who elect to enroll, in a health 
 program of the Indian Health Service under section 8302(b) or 
 8306(b), that program shall be the applicable health plan.

SEC. 1006. TREATMENT OF OTHER NONIMMIGRANTS.

 (a) Certain Aliens Ineligible for Benefits.--An alien who is not an 
eligible individual or otherwise not made eligible under this Act for 
benefits is not eligible to obtain the comprehensive benefit package 
through enrollment in a health plan under this Act.
 (b) Diplomats and Other Foreign Government Officials.--Subject to 
conditions established by the National Health Board in consultation 
with the Secretary of State, a nonimmigrant under subparagraph (A) or 
(G) of section 101(a)(15) of the Immigration and Nationality Act may 
obtain the comprehensive benefit package through enrollment in the 
community-rated health plan for the health care coverage area in which 
the nonimmigrant resides.
 (c) Reciprocal Treatment of Other Nonimmigrants.--With respect to 
those classes of individuals who are lawful nonimmigrants but who are 
not long-term nonimmigrants (as defined in section 1902(27)) or 
described in subsection (b), such individuals may obtain such benefits 
through enrollment with community-rated health plans only in accordance 
with such reciprocal agreements between the United States and foreign 
states as may be entered into.
 (d) Construction.--The National Health Board shall adopt procedures 
that assure that each person who is eligible for enrollment in an 
applicable health plan is able to enroll in such a plan.

SEC. 1007. EFFECTIVE DATE OF ENTITLEMENT.

 (a) Community Rate Eligible Individuals.--
 (1) In general.--In the case of community rate eligible 
 individuals residing in a State, the entitlement under this 
 part (and requirements under section 1002) shall not take 
 effect until the State becomes a participating State (as 
 defined in section 1200).
 (2) Transitional rule for large group sponsors.--
 (A) In general.--In the case of a State that 
 becomes a participating State before the general 
 effective date (as defined in subsection (c)) and for 
 periods before such date, under rules established by 
 the Board, an individual who is covered under a plan 
 (described in subparagraph (C)) based on the individual 
 (or the individual's spouse) being a qualifying 
 employee of a qualifying employer, the individual shall 
 not be treated under this Act as a community rate 
 eligible individual.
 (B) Qualifying employer defined.--In subparagraph 
 (A), the term ``qualifying employer'' means an employer 
 that--
 (i) is described in section 1401(2), or is 
 participating in a multiemployer plan described 
 in section 1401(6)(B) or plan described in 
 section 1401(7), and
 (ii) provides such notice to the State 
 involved as the Board specifies.
 (C) Benefits plan described.--A plan described in 
 this subparagraph is an employee benefit plan that--
 (i) provides (through insurance or 
 otherwise) the comprehensive benefit package, 
 and
 (ii) provides an employer contribution of 
 at least 80 percent of the premium (or premium 
 equivalent) for coverage.
 (b) Experience-Rate Eligible Individuals.--
 (1) In general.--In the case of experience rate eligible 
 individuals, the entitlement under this part shall not take 
 effect until the general effective date.
 (2) Transition.--For purposes of this Act and before the 
 general effective date, in the case of an eligible individual 
 who resides in a participating State, the individual is deemed 
 a community rate eligible individual until the individual 
 becomes an experience rate eligible individual, unless 
 subsection (a)(2)(A) applies to the individual.
 (c) General Effective Date Defined.--In this Act, the term 
``general effective date'' means January 1, 1998.

 PART 2--TREATMENT OF FAMILIES AND SPECIAL RULES

SEC. 1011. GENERAL RULE OF ENROLLMENT OF FAMILY IN SAME HEALTH PLAN.

 (a) In General.--Except as provided in this part or otherwise, all 
members of the same family (as defined in subsection (b)) shall be 
enrolled in the same applicable health plan.
 (b) Family Defined.--In this Act, unless otherwise provided, the 
term ``family''--
 (1) means, with respect to an eligible individual who is 
 not a child (as defined in subsection (c)), the individual; and
 (2) includes the following persons (if any):
 (A) The individual's spouse if the spouse is an 
 eligible individual.
 (B) The individual's children (and, if applicable, 
 the children of the individual's spouse) if they are 
 eligible individuals.
 (c) Classes of Family Enrollment; Terminology.--
 (1) In general.--In this Act, each of the following is a 
 separate class of family enrollment:
 (A) Coverage only of an individual (referred to in 
 this Act as the ``individual'' enrollment or class of 
 enrollment).
 (B) Coverage of a married couple without children 
 (referred to in this Act as the ``couple-only'' 
 enrollment or class of enrollment).
 (C) Coverage of an unmarried individual and one or 
 more children (referred to in this Act as the ``single 
 parent'' enrollment or class of enrollment).
 (D) Coverage of a married couple and one or more 
 children (referred to in this Act as the ``dual 
 parent'' enrollment or class of enrollment).
 (2) References to family and couple classes of 
 enrollment.--In this Act:
 (A) Family.--The terms ``family enrollment'' and 
 ``family class of enrollment'', refer to enrollment in 
 a class of enrollment described in subparagraph (B), 
 (C), or (D) of paragraph (1).
 (B) Couple.--The term ``couple class of 
 enrollment'' refers to enrollment in a class of 
 enrollment described in subparagraph (B) or (D) of 
 paragraph (1).
 (d) Spouse; Married; Couple.--
 (1) In general.--In this Act, the terms ``spouse'' and 
 ``married'' mean, with respect to a person, another individual 
 who is the spouse of the person or married to the person, as 
 determined under applicable State law.
 (2) Couple.--The term ``couple'' means an individual and 
 the individual's spouse.
 (e) Child Defined.--
 (1) In general.--In this Act, except as otherwise provided, 
 the term ``child'' means an eligible individual who (consistent 
 with paragraph (3))--
 (A) is under 25 years of age, and
 (B) is a dependent of an eligible individual.
 The Board may adjust the age limitation in subparagraph (A) 
 with respect to part-time or full-time students if the Board, 
 through a Congressional Budget Office study, determines that 
 such limitation necessitates adjustments for cost savings 
 purposes.
 (2) Application of state law.--Subject to paragraph (3), 
 determinations of whether a person is the child of another 
 person shall be made in accordance with applicable State law.
 (3) National rules.--The National Health Board may 
 establish such national rules respecting individuals who will 
 be treated as children under this Act as the Board determines 
 to be necessary. Such rules shall be consistent with the 
 following principles:
 (A) Step child.--A child includes a step child who 
 is an eligible individual living with an adult in a 
 regular parent-child relationship.
 (B) Disabled child.--A child includes an unmarried 
 dependent eligible individual regardless of age who is 
 incapable of self-support because of mental or physical 
 disability which existed before age 21.
 (C) Certain intergenerational families.--A child 
 includes the grandchild of an individual if--
 (i) the parent of the grandchild is a child 
 and the parent and grandchild are living with 
 the grandparent; or
 (ii) the grandparent has legal custody of 
 the grandchild.
 (D) Treatment of emancipated minors and married 
 individuals.--An emancipated minor or married 
 individual shall not be treated as a child.
 (E) Children placed for adoption.--A child includes 
 a child who is placed for adoption with an eligible 
 individual, except when the child is a child in State 
 supervised care.
 (f) Additional Rules.--The Board shall provide for such additional 
exceptions and special rules, including rules relating to--
 (1) families in which members are not residing in the same 
 area or in which children are not residing with their parents,
 (2) the treatment of eligible individuals who are under 25 
 years of age and who are not a dependent of an eligible 
 individual,
 (3) changes in family composition occurring during a year,
 (4) treatment of children in State supervised care, and
 (5) treatment of children of parents who are separated or 
 divorced,
as the Board finds appropriate.

SEC. 1012. TREATMENT OF CERTAIN FAMILIES.

 (a) Treatment of Medicare-Eligible Individuals Who are Qualifying 
Employees or Spouses of Qualifying Employees.--
 (1) In general.--Except as specifically provided, in the 
 case of an individual who is an individual described in 
 paragraph (2) with respect to 2 consecutive months in a year 
 (and it is anticipated would be in the following month and in 
 such following month would be a medicare-eligible individual 
 but for this paragraph), the individual shall not be treated as 
 a medicare-eligible individual under this Act during such 
 following month and the remainder of the year.
 (2) Individual described.--An individual described in this 
 paragraph with respect to a month is an individual who is a 
 qualifying employee or the spouse or family member of a 
 qualifying employee in the month.
 (b) Separate Treatment for Certain Groups of Individuals.--In the 
case of a family that includes one or more individuals in a group 
described in subsection (c)--
 (1) all the individuals in each such group within the 
 family shall be treated collectively as a separate family, and
 (2) all the individuals not described in any such group 
 shall be treated collectively as a separate family.
 (c) Groups of Individuals Described.--Each of the following is a 
group of individuals described in this subsection:
 (1) AFDC recipients (as defined in section 1902(2)).
 (2) Disabled SSI recipients (as defined in section 
 1902(14)) .
 (3) SSI recipients (as defined in section 1902(46)) who are 
 not disabled SSI recipients.
 (4) Electing veterans (as defined in subsection (d)(1)).
 (5) Active duty military personnel (as defined in 
 subsection (d)(2)).
 (6) Electing American Indians (as defined in subsection 
 (d)(3)).
 (7) Prisoners (as defined in section 1902(37)).
 (d) Special Rules.--In this Act:
 (1) Electing veterans.--
 (A) Defined.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the term 
 ``electing veteran'' means a veteran who makes an 
 election to enroll with a health plan of the Department 
 of Veterans Affairs under chapter 18 of title 38, 
 United States Code, as added by section 8101(a)(1).
 (B) Family exception.--Subparagraph (A) shall not 
 apply with respect to coverage under a health plan 
 referred to in such subparagraph if, for the area in 
 which the electing veteran resides, such health plan 
 offers coverage to family members of an electing 
 veteran and the veteran elects family enrollment under 
 such plan (instead of individual enrollment).
 (2) Active duty military personnel.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the 
 term ``active duty military personnel'' means an 
 individual on active duty in the Uniformed Services of 
 the United States.
 (B) Exception.--If an individual described in 
 subparagraph (A) elects family coverage under section 
 1073a(e)(2)(A) of title 10, United States Code (as 
 added by section 8001(a)), then paragraph (5) of 
 subsection (c) shall not apply with respect to such 
 coverage.
 (3) Electing american indians.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the 
 term ``electing American Indian'' means an eligible 
 individual who makes an election under section 8302(b) 
 of this Act.
 (B) Family election for all individuals eligible to 
 elect.--No such election shall be made with respect to 
 an individual in a family (as defined without regard to 
 this section) unless such election is made for all 
 eligible individuals (described in section 8302(a)) who 
 are family members of the family.
 (4) Multiple choice.--Eligible individuals who are 
 permitted to elect coverage under more than one health plan or 
 program referred to in this subsection may elect which of such 
 plans or programs will be the applicable health plan under this 
 Act.
 (e) Qualifying Students.--
 (1) In general.--In the case of a qualifying student 
 (described in paragraph (2)), the student may elect to enroll 
 in a community-rate health plan offered for the health care 
 coverage area in which the school is located.
 (2) Qualifying student.--In paragraph (1), the term 
 ``qualifying student'' means an individual who--
 (A) but for this subsection would receive coverage 
 under a health plan as a child of another person, and
 (B) is a full-time student at a school in a health 
 care coverage area that is different from the area (or, 
 in the case of a large group sponsor, such coverage 
 area as the Board may specify) providing the coverage 
 described in subparagraph (A).
 (3) Payment rules.--
 (A) Continued treatment as family.--Except as 
 provided in subparagraph (B), nothing in this 
 subsection shall be construed as affecting the payment 
 liabilities between families and community-rated health 
 plans.
 (B) Transfer payment.--In the case of an election 
 under paragraph (1), for transfer payments see section 
 1238.
 (f) Spouses Living in Different Health Care Coverage Areas.--The 
Board shall provide for such special rules in applying this Act in the 
case of a couple in which the spouses reside in different health care 
coverage areas as the Board finds appropriate.
 (g) Children in State-Supervised Care.--
 (1) In general.--In the case of a qualifying child in 
 State-supervised care (as described in paragraph (2)), the 
 child shall be considered as a family of one and enrolled by 
 the State agency who has been awarded temporary or permanent 
 custody of the child (or which has legal responsibility for the 
 child) in a fee-for-service plan unless the State agency has 
 established a special health service delivery system designated 
 to customize and more efficiently provide health services to 
 children in State-supervised care, in which case the State 
 agency will enroll the child in the plan appropriate to ensure 
 access to such a special health service delivery system.
 (2) Children in state-supervised care.--For purposes of 
 paragraph (1), the term ``child in State-supervised care'' 
 means any child who is residing away from his or her parents 
 and is temporarily or permanently, on a voluntary or 
 involuntary basis, under the responsibility of a public child 
 welfare or juvenile services agency or court. Such term 
 includes children who are not yet made wards of the court or 
 adjudicated as delinquents residing in emergency shelter care, 
 children in the physical custody of public or private agencies, 
 and children who are with foster parents, or other group or 
 residential care providers. Such term also includes children 
 who are legally adopted and for whom the Federal or State 
 government is providing adoption assistance payments.

SEC. 1013. MULTIPLE EMPLOYMENT SITUATIONS.

 (a) Multiple Employment of an Individual.--In the case of an 
individual who--
 (1)(A) is not married or (B) is married and whose spouse is 
 not a qualifying employee (as defined in section 1901(b)(1)),
 (2) is not a child, and
 (3) who is a qualifying employee both of a community rate 
 employer and of a experience rate employer (or of 2 large group 
 sponsor employers),
the individual may elect the applicable health plan to be either a 
community-rated health plan (for the health care coverage area in which 
the individual resides) or an experience-rated health plan (for an 
employer employing the individual).
 (b) Multiple Employment Within a Family.--
 (1) Married couple with employment community rate employer 
 and with a experience rate employer.--In the case of a married 
 individual--
 (A) who is a qualifying employee of a community 
 rate employer and whose spouse is a qualifying employee 
 of a experience rate employer, or
 (B) who is a qualifying employee of an experience 
 rate employer and whose spouse is a qualifying employee 
 of a community rate employer,
 the individual and the individual's spouse may elect the 
 applicable health plan to be either a community-rated health 
 plan (for the health care coverage area in which the couple 
 resides) or an experience-rated health plan (for an employer 
 employing the individual or the spouse).
 (2) Married couple with different employers.--In the case 
 of a married individual--
 (A) who is a qualifying employee of a experience 
 rate employer, and
 (B) whose spouse is a qualifying employee of a 
 different experience rate employer,
 the individual and the individual's spouse may elect the 
 applicable health plan to be an experience-rated health plan 
 for an employer employing either the individual or the spouse.

SEC. 1014. TREATMENT OF RESIDENTS OF STATES WITH STATEWIDE SINGLE-PAYER 
 SYSTEMS.

 (a) Universal Coverage.--Notwithstanding the previous provisions of 
this title, except as provided in part 2 of subtitle C, in the case of 
an individual who resides in a State that has a Statewide single-payer 
system under section 1223, universal coverage shall be provided 
consistent with section 1222(3).
 (b) Individual Responsibilities.--In the case of an individual who 
resides in a single-payer State, the responsibilities of such 
individual under such system shall supersede the obligations of the 
individual under section 1002.

 Subtitle B--Benefits

 PART 1--COMPREHENSIVE BENEFIT PACKAGE

SEC. 1101. PROVISION OF COMPREHENSIVE BENEFITS BY PLANS.

 (a) In General.--Subject to the provisions of section 1603, the 
comprehensive benefit package shall consist of the following items and 
services (as described in this part), subject to the cost sharing 
requirements described in part 3, the exclusions described in part 4, 
and the duties and authority of the National Health Board described in 
part 5:
 (1) Hospital services.
 (2) Services of health professionals.
 (3) Emergency and ambulatory medical and surgical services.
 (4) Clinical preventive services.
 (5) Mental illness and substance abuse services.
 (6) Family planning services and services for pregnant 
 women.
 (7) Hospice care.
 (8) Home health care.
 (9) Extended care services.
 (10) Ambulance services.
 (11) Outpatient laboratory, radiology, and diagnostic 
 services.
 (12) Outpatient prescription drugs and biologicals.
 (13) Outpatient rehabilitation services.
 (14) Durable medical equipment and prosthetic and orthotic 
 devices.
 (15) Vision care.
 (16) Hearing aids for children.
 (17) Dental care.
 (18) Investigational treatments.
 (19) Optional services, such as--
 (A) health education classes; and
 (B) extra contractual services.
 (b) No Other Limitations or Cost Sharing.--The items and services 
in the comprehensive benefit package shall not be subject to any 
duration or scope limitation or any deductible, copayment, or 
coinsurance amount that is not required or authorized under this Act.

SEC. 1102. HOSPITAL SERVICES.

 (a) Coverage.--The hospital services described in this section are 
the following items and services:
 (1) Inpatient hospital services.
 (2) Outpatient hospital services.
 (3) 24-hour a day hospital emergency services.
 (b) Limitation.--The hospital services described in this section do 
not include hospital services provided for the treatment of a mental or 
substance abuse disorder (which are subject to section 1106), except 
for medical detoxification as required for the management of medical 
conditions associated with withdrawal from alcohol or drugs (which is 
not covered under such section).

SEC. 1103. SERVICES OF HEALTH PROFESSIONALS.

 (a) Coverage.--The items and services described in this section 
are--
 (1) inpatient and outpatient health professional services, 
 including consultations, that are provided in--
 (A) a home, office, or other ambulatory care 
 setting; or
 (B) an institutional setting; and
 (2) services and supplies (including drugs and biologicals 
 which cannot be self-administered) furnished as an incident to 
 such health professional services, of kinds which are commonly 
 furnished in the office of a health professional and are 
 commonly either rendered without charge or included in the bill 
 of such professional.
 (b) Definitions.--Unless otherwise provided in this Act, for 
purposes of this Act:
 (1) Health professional.--The term ``health professional'' 
 means an individual who provides health professional services.
 (2) Health professional services.--The term ``health 
 professional services'' means professional services that--
 (A) are lawfully provided by a physician; or
 (B) would be described in subparagraph (A) if 
 provided by a physician, but are provided by another 
 person who is legally authorized to provide such 
 services in the State in which the services are 
 provided.

SEC. 1104. EMERGENCY AND AMBULATORY MEDICAL AND SURGICAL SERVICES.

 The items and services described in this section are 24 hour-a-day 
emergency services, and ambulatory medical and surgical services 
provided by a facility that is not a hospital and that is legally 
authorized to provide the services in the State in which they are 
provided.

SEC. 1105. CLINICAL PREVENTIVE SERVICES.

 (a) Coverage.--The clinical preventive services described in this 
section are the following items or services provided consistent with 
any periodicity schedule or other modification promulgated by the Board 
under section 1153, including regulations establishing periodicity 
schedules for high risk populations:
 (1) Age appropriate immunizations consistent with the 
 periodicity schedule recommended by the Advisory Council on 
 Immunization Practices, in consultation with the American 
 Academy of Pediatrics.
 (2) Age appropriate tests and clinician visits (including 
 preventive counseling and health advice) for individuals under 
 the age of 20, consistent with a periodicity schedule 
 recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics and other 
 experts in clinical preventive services for children and 
 adolescents.
 (3) Clinician visits for individuals age 20 and over as 
 follows:
 (A) Every 3 years for individuals age 20 through 
 39.
 (B) Biannually for individuals age 40 through 64.
 (C) Annually for individuals age 65 and over.
 (4) Cholesterol tests every 5 years for individuals age 20 
 and over.
 (5) Papanicolaou smears and pelvic exams for females who 
 are at risk for cervical cancer--
 (A) annually between the ages of 13 through 64 
 unless three consecutive annual pap smears have been 
 negative and it has been determined that the female is 
 not at risk for sexually transmitted diseases, in which 
 case coverage shall be once every 2 years; and
 (B) every 2 years for females age 65 and over.
 (6) Annual screening for chlamydia and gonorrhea for 
 sexually active females unless such individual is determined by 
 the health care provider not to be at risk for sexually 
 transmitted diseases.
 (7) Mammograms for females as follows:
 (A) Ages 40 through 49, every 2 years in 
 consultation with their physician.
 (B) Ages 50 through 64, every year.
 (C) Age 65 and over, every 2 years.
 (b) Colorectal Cancer Screenings.--The comprehensive benefit 
package shall include any revisions to colorectal cancer screenings 
that are recommended by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force in the 
periodic update of the Guide to Clinical Preventive Services planned 
for release in November, 1994. The National Health Board shall utilize 
any subsequent U.S. Preventive Services Task Force updates as its 
primary guidance in updating these clinical preventive services.
 (c) Clinician Visit.--For purposes of this section, the term 
``clinician visit'' includes the following health professional services 
(as defined in section 1102(c)):
 (1) A complete medical history.
 (2) An appropriate physical examination.
 (3) Risk assessment, including for domestic violence.
 (4) Targeted health advice and counseling, including 
 nutrition counseling.
 (5) The administration of age-appropriate immunizations and 
 tests specified in subsection (a).

SEC. 1106. MENTAL ILLNESS AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE SERVICES.

 (a) Coverage.--The mental illness and substance abuse services that 
are described in this section are the following items and services for 
eligible individuals, as defined in section 1001(c), including 
individuals with multiple mental disorders or mental retardation and 
mental illness, who satisfy the eligibility requirements in subsection 
(b):
 (1) Inpatient mental illness and substance abuse treatment 
 (described in subsection (d)).
 (2) Residential mental illness and substance abuse 
 treatment (described in subsection (e)).
 (3) Intensive nonresidential mental illness and substance 
 abuse treatment (described in subsection (f)).
 (4) Outpatient mental illness and substance abuse treatment 
 (described in subsection (g)), including case management, 
 screening and assessment, crisis services, and collateral 
 services.
 (b) Eligibility.--The eligibility requirements referred to in 
subsection (a) are as follows:
 (1) Inpatient, residential, nonres- idential, and 
 outpatient treatment.--An eligible individual is eligible to 
 receive coverage for inpatient and residential mental illness 
 and substance abuse treatment, intensive nonresidential mental 
 illness and substance abuse treatment, or outpatient mental 
 illness and substance abuse treatment (except case management, 
 screening and assessment, crisis services, and collateral 
 services) if the individual--
 (A) has, or has had during the 1-year period 
 preceding the date of such treatment, a diagnosable 
 mental disorder or a diagnosable substance abuse 
 disorder or, in the case of a child 5 years of age or 
 less, is at risk of a mental disorder; and
 (B) is experiencing, or is at significant risk of 
 experiencing, functional impairment in family, work, 
 school, or community activities.
 For purposes of this paragraph, an individual who has a 
 diagnosable mental disorder or a diagnosable substance abuse 
 disorder, is receiving treatment for such disorder, but does 
 not satisfy the functional impairment criterion in subparagraph 
 (B) shall be treated as satisfying such criterion if the 
 individual would satisfy such criterion without such treatment.
 (2) Case management.--An eligible individual is eligible to 
 receive coverage for case management if the individual is 
 eligible to receive coverage for, and is receiving, mental 
 illness and substance abuse treatment with respect to a 
 diagnosable mental disorder or a diagnosable substance abuse 
 disorder.
 (3) Screening and assessment and crisis services.--All 
 eligible individuals enrolled under a health plan are eligible 
 to receive coverage for outpatient mental illness and substance 
 abuse treatment consisting of screening and assessment and 
 crisis services.
 (4) Collateral services.--An eligible individual is 
 eligible to receive coverage for outpatient mental illness and 
 substance abuse treatment consisting of collateral services if 
 the individual is a family member (described in section 
 1011(b)) of an individual who is receiving inpatient and 
 residential mental illness and substance abuse treatment, 
 intensive nonresidential mental illness and substance abuse 
 treatment, or outpatient mental illness and substance abuse 
 treatment.
 (c) Health Professional.--
 (1) In general.--The National Health Board shall specify 
 those health professional services described in section 1103 
 that shall be treated as inpatient, residential, intensive 
 nonresidential, and outpatient mental illness and substance 
 abuse treatment.
 (2) Rule of construction.--Nothing in section 1861(e) of 
 the Social Security Act, including paragraph (4), shall be 
 construed as requiring that individuals receiving items and 
 services under this section be under the care of a physician 
 when such individuals are under the care of a mental health or 
 substance abuse health professional in a State in which such 
 care is permitted by State law.
 (d) Inpatient Treatment.--
 (1) Definition.--For purposes of this subtitle, the term 
 ``inpatient mental illness and substance abuse treatment'' 
 means the items and services described in paragraphs (1) 
 through (3) of section 1861(b) of the Social Security Act when 
 provided with respect to a diagnosable mental disorder or a 
 diagnosable substance abuse disorder to an inpatient of a 
 hospital or psychiatric hospital.
 (2) Limitations.--Coverage for inpatient mental illness and 
 substance abuse treatment is subject to the following 
 limitations:
 (A) Inpatient hospital treatment for substance 
 abuse.--Such treatment, when provided in a hospital or 
 a psychiatric hospital with respect to a diagnosable 
 substance abuse disorder, is covered under this section 
 only for detoxification requiring the management of 
 psychiatric conditions associated with withdrawal from 
 alcohol or drugs. The items and services described in 
 this section do not include medical detoxification as 
 required for the management of medical conditions 
 associated with withdrawal from alcohol or drugs (which 
 is covered under section 1102).
 (B) Annual limit.--Prior to January 1, 2001, such 
 treatment, when furnished to an inpatient of a hospital 
 or psychiatric hospital is subject to an aggregate 
 annual limit of 34 days, 15 of which may not be reduced 
 in substitution for other covered services. On or after 
 such date, such annual aggregate limit shall not apply.
 (e) Residential Treatment.--
 (1) Definition.--For purposes of this subtitle, the term 
 ``residential mental illness and substance abuse treatment'' 
 means the items and services provided with respect to a 
 diagnosable mental disorder or a diagnosable substance abuse 
 disorder to a resident of a residential treatment center, 
 residential detoxification center, crisis residential program, 
 mental illness residential treatment program, therapeutic 
 family home, therapeutic community, group treatment home, 
 community residential treatment program, or recovery center for 
 substance abuse.
 (2) Annual limit.--
 (A) In general.--Prior to January 1, 2001, the 
 number of covered days of residential mental illness 
 and substance abuse treatment that are available to an 
 individual under the 34-day limit described in the 
 first sentence of subsection (d)(2)(B), shall be 
 reduced by 1 day for each 4 covered days of residential 
 mental illness and substance abuse treatment that are 
 provided to the individual, until such number is 
 reduced to 15. After such number is reduced to 15, no 
 residential treatment may be covered, except as 
 provided in subparagraph (B). On or after such date, 
 such annual aggregate limit shall not apply.
 (B) Nonapplication.--The limit contained in 
 subparagraph (A) shall not apply to mental health and 
 substance abuse treatment provided in a therapeutic 
 community, halfway house, recovery center or other 
 comparably inexpensive residential mental health and 
 substance abuse treatment facility, as determined by 
 the National Health Board.
 (f) Intensive Nonresidential Treatment.--
 (1) Definition.--For purposes of this subtitle, the term 
 ``intensive nonresidential mental illness and substance abuse 
 treatment'' means diagnostic or therapeutic items or services 
 provided with respect to a diagnosable mental disorder or a 
 diagnosable substance abuse disorder to an individual--
 (A) participating in a partial hospitalization 
 program, a mental health consumer-run service center, a 
 day treatment program, a psychiatric rehabilitation 
 program, or an ambulatory detoxification program; or
 (B) receiving home-based mental illness services or 
 behavioral aide mental illness services.
 (2) Limitations.--Coverage for intensive nonresidential 
 mental illness and substance abuse treatment is subject to the 
 following limitations:
 (A) Treatment purposes.--Such treatment is covered 
 only when provided--
 (i) to avert the need for treatment in 
 residential or inpatient settings;
 (ii) to facilitate the earlier discharge of 
 an individual receiving inpatient or 
 residential care;
 (iii) to restore the functioning of an 
 individual with a diagnosable mental disorder 
 or a diagnosable substance abuse disorder; or
 (iv) to assist such an individual to 
 develop the skills and gain access to the 
 support services the individual needs to 
 achieve the maximum level of functioning of the 
 individual within the community.
 (B) Detoxification.--Intensive nonresidential 
 substance abuse treatment consisting of detoxification 
 is covered only if it is provided in the context of a 
 treatment program.
 (g) Outpatient Treatment.--
 (1) Definition.--For purposes of this subtitle, the term 
 ``outpatient mental illness and substance abuse treatment'' 
 means the following services provided with respect to a 
 diagnosable mental disorder or a diagnosable substance abuse 
 disorder in an outpatient setting:
 (A) Screening and assessment.
 (B) Diagnosis.
 (C) Medications management.
 (D) Substance abuse counseling and relapse 
 prevention.
 (E) Crisis services.
 (F) Somatic treatment services.
 (G) Psychotherapy.
 (H) Case management.
 (I) Collateral services.
 (2) Limitations.--Coverage for outpatient mental illness 
 and substance abuse treatment is subject to the following 
 limitations:
 (A) Health professional services.--Such treatment 
 is covered only when it constitutes health professional 
 services (as defined in section 1103(b)(2)).
 (B) Detoxification.--Outpatient substance abuse 
 treatment consisting of detoxification is covered only 
 if it is provided in the context of a treatment 
 program.
 (h) Management of Care for Mental Illness and Substance Abuse.--
 (1) Provision of treatment.--Quality managed care 
 techniques shall be utilized by health plans to ensure that all 
 necessary care is provided in the most appropriate, cost 
 effective setting, and that unnecessary care is not provided.
 (2) Quality managed care.--The term ``quality managed 
 care'' refers to the administration of benefits through the 
 methods of central intake, preauthorization, and utilization 
 review. Health plans may contract with specialized behavioral 
 care entities to administer benefits if such entities are 
 certified by the State as proficient in the use of quality 
 managed care techniques that facilitate the provision of 
 clinically appropriate, cost-effective, and confidential 
 treatment, providing continuity of care between and among 
 treatment providers.
 (3) Treatment decisions.--
 (A) Treatment placement decisions shall be based 
 primarily on medical necessity. Criteria used for 
 placement shall be based on uniform assessment tools 
 recognized by treatment and other professional 
 organizations in the fields of mental illness and 
 substance abuse or approved for use by the National 
 Health Board and shall be publicly available.
 (B) All treatment assessment and placement 
 decisions or review of such decisions shall be made by 
 personnel--
 (i) licensed, certified, or otherwise 
 credentialed by the State in the field for 
 which the assessment or treatment is sought 
 (such as mental health or substance abuse) and 
 qualified to review utilization of the specific 
 treatment delivered; and
 (ii) with no financial stake in the outcome 
 of such decisions.
 (4) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
 construed as prohibiting health plans from providing mental 
 health and substance abuse treatment through fee-for-service 
 arrangements.
 (i) Special Delivery Requirements for Services Provided to 
Children.--
 (1) Requiring services to be provided through organized 
 systems of care.--Health plans shall ensure that the mental 
 illness and substance abuse services described in this section 
 and furnished to an eligible person are furnished through 
 organized systems of care, as described in paragraph (2), if 
 the eligible person is a person under 22 years of age who has a 
 serious emotional disturbance or a substance abuse disorder, 
 and who is, or is at imminent risk of being, involved with one 
 or more public child-serving agencies, including child welfare, 
 special education, and juvenile or criminal justice.
 (2) Requirements of system of care.--As used in this 
 subsection, the term ``organized system of care'' means a 
 community-based service delivery network, which may consist of 
 public and private providers, that meets the following 
 requirements:
 (A) The system has established linkages with 
 existing mental illness and substance abuse service 
 delivery programs in the plan service area (or is in 
 the process of developing or operating a system with 
 appropriate public agencies in the area to coordinate 
 the delivery of such services to individuals in the 
 area).
 (B) The system provides for the participation and 
 coordination of multiple agencies and providers that 
 serve the needs of children in the area, including 
 agencies and providers involved with child welfare, 
 education, juvenile or criminal justice, health care, 
 mental health, and substance abuse prevention and 
 treatment.
 (C) The system provides for the involvement of the 
 families of children to whom mental illness and 
 substance abuse services are provided in the planning 
 of treatment and the delivery of services.
 (D) The system provides for the development and 
 implementation of individualized treatment plans by 
 multidisciplinary and multiagency teams, that are 
 recognized and followed by the applicable agencies and 
 providers in the area.
 (E) The system ensures the delivery and 
 coordination of the range of mental illness and 
 substance abuse services required by individuals under 
 22 years of age who have a serious emotional 
 disturbance or a substance abuse disorder.
 (F) The system provides for the management of the 
 individualized treatment plans described in 
 subparagraph (D) and for a flexible response to changes 
 in treatment needs over time.
 (3) Full implementation of plan.--Subject to paragraph 
 (2)(F), the State shall assure that public or philanthropic 
 resources are available to implement each child's plan, 
 including residential treatment in excess of the limit set 
 forth in subsection (e) if the State determines that such 
 treatment is clinically appropriate.
 (4) Rule of construction.--The organized system of care 
 shall not exclude health professionals whose services are 
 covered by the health plan selected by the child or the child's 
 legal guardian.
 (5) Requirements of states.--The State shall ensure that 
 public agencies furnishing services to children with serious 
 emotional disturbances, including mental health, child welfare, 
 special education, juvenile justice, and other agencies, 
 establish policies that result in effective collaboration and 
 coordination among such agencies and the health plans 
 established in the State. Such collaboration may include 
 policies to blend public funds with health plan resources to 
 meet such children's needs or risk adjustment payments to 
 health plans.

SEC. 1107. FAMILY PLANNING SERVICES AND SERVICES FOR PREGNANT WOMEN.

 The services described in this section are the following items and 
services:
 (1) Voluntary comprehensive family planning services, 
 including family planning counseling and education.
 (2) Contraceptive drugs and devices, subject to approval by 
 the Secretary under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
 (3) Services for pregnant women.

SEC. 1108. HOSPICE CARE.

 The hospice care described in this section is the items and 
services described in paragraph (1) of section 1861(dd) of the Social 
Security Act, as defined in paragraphs (2), (3), and (4)(A) of such 
section, except that all references to the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services in such paragraphs shall be treated as references to the 
National Health Board.

SEC. 1109. HOME HEALTH CARE.

 (a) Coverage.--The home health care described in this section is--
 (1) the items and services described in section 1861(m) of 
 the Social Security Act; and
 (2) home infusion drug therapy services.
 (b) Limitations.--Coverage for home health care is subject to the 
following limitations:
 (1) Inpatient treatment alternative.--Such care is covered 
 only as an alternative to inpatient treatment in a hospital, 
 skilled nursing facility, or rehabilitation facility as a 
 result of an illness, injury, disorder or other health 
 condition.
 (2) Reevaluation.--At the end of each 60-day period of home 
 health care, the need for continued care shall be reevaluated 
 by the person who is primarily responsible for providing the 
 home health care. Additional periods of care are covered only 
 if such person determines that the requirement in paragraph (1) 
 is satisfied.

SEC. 1110. EXTENDED CARE SERVICES.

 (a) Coverage.--The extended care services described in this section 
are the items and services described in section 1861(h) of the Social 
Security Act when provided to an inpatient of a skilled nursing 
facility or a rehabilitation facility.
 (b) Limitations.--Coverage for extended care services is subject to 
the following limitations:
 (1) Hospital services alternative.--Such services are 
 covered only as an alternative to treatment for inpatient 
 hospital services as a result of an illness, injury, disorder 
 or other health condition.
 (2) Annual limit.--Such services are subject to an 
 aggregate annual limit of 100 days, except that such limit may 
 be waived if the need for continued care is re-evaluated by the 
 prescribing health care professional and determined to be a 
 cost effective alternative to necessary hospital services.

SEC. 1111. AMBULANCE SERVICES.

 The ambulance services described in this section are covered only 
when indicated by the medical condition of the individual concerned. 
Such services include--
 (1) ground transportation by ambulance; or
 (2) air or water transportation by an aircraft or vessel 
 equipped for transporting an injured or sick individual in 
 cases in which there is no other method of transportation or 
 where the use of another method of transportation is 
 contraindicated by the medical condition of the individual 
 concerned.

SEC. 1112. OUTPATIENT LABORATORY, RADIOLOGY, AND DIAGNOSTIC SERVICES.

 The items and services described in this section are laboratory, 
radiology, and diagnostic services (including genetic testing and 
counseling) provided upon prescription to individuals who are not 
inpatients of a hospital, hospice, skilled nursing facility, or 
rehabilitation facility.

SEC. 1113. OUTPATIENT PRESCRIPTION DRUGS AND BIOLOGICALS.

 The items described in this section are the following:
 (1) Covered outpatient drugs described in section 1861(t) 
 of the Social Security Act--
 (A) except that, for purposes of this section, a 
 medically accepted indication with respect to the use 
 of a covered outpatient drug includes any use which has 
 been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for 
 the drug, and includes another use of the drug if--
 (i) the drug has been approved by the Food 
 and Drug Administration; and
 (ii) such use is supported by one or more 
 citations which are included (or approved for 
 inclusion) in one or more of the following 
 compendia: the American Hospital Formulary 
 Service-Drug Information, the American Medical 
 Association Drug Evaluations, the United States 
 Pharmacopoeia-Drug Information, and other 
 authoritative compendia as identified by the 
 Secretary, unless the Secretary has determined 
 that the use is not medically appropriate or 
 the use is identified as not indicated in one 
 or more such compendia; or
 (iii) such use is medically accepted based 
 on supportive clinical evidence in peer 
 reviewed medical literature appearing in 
 publications which have been identified for 
 purposes of this clause by the Secretary; and
 (B) notwithstanding any exclusion from coverage 
 that may be made with respect to such a drug under 
 title XVIII of such Act pursuant to section 1862(a)(18) 
 of such Act.
 (2) Blood clotting factors when provided on an outpatient 
 basis.
 (3) Medical foods prescribed by a physician that comply 
 with the requirements of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
 Act and that treat inborn errors of metabolism identified by 
 the Secretary as rendering a person unable to sustain life 
 without significant mental or physical impairment by the 
 ingestion of conventional foods.
 (4) Accessories and supplies that are used directly with 
 drugs and biologics to achieve the therapeutic benefit of such 
 drugs or biologics.

SEC. 1114. OUTPATIENT REHABILITATION SERVICES.

 (a) Coverage.--The outpatient rehabilitation services described in 
this section are--
 (1) outpatient occupational therapy;
 (2) outpatient physical therapy;
 (3) outpatient respiratory therapy; and
 (4) outpatient speech-language pathology services and 
 audiology services.
 (b) Limitations.--Coverage for outpatient rehabilitation services 
is subject to the following limitations:
 (1) Restoration of capacity or minimization of 
 limitations.--Such services include only items or services used 
 to restore functional capacity or minimize limitations on 
 physical and cognitive functions as a result of an illness, 
 injury, disorder or other health condition.
 (2) Maintenance of function or prevention of 
 deterioration.--To the extent that the services described in 
 paragraph (1) are for the purpose of maintaining functioning or 
 preventing deterioration, such services shall be limited to--
 (A) the initial evaluation and periodic oversight 
 of the patient's needs by a qualified rehabilitation 
 health professional;
 (B) the designing by the qualified rehabilitation 
 health professional of a maintenance or prevention 
 program that is appropriate considering the capacity 
 and tolerance of the patient and the treatment 
 objectives;
 (C) the instruction of the patient, family members, 
 or support personnel in carrying out the program; and
 (D) reevaluations.
 (3) Reevaluation.--
 (A) In general.--At the end of each 60-day period 
 of outpatient rehabilitation services (other than 
 services described in paragraph (2)), the need for 
 continued services shall be reevaluated by the person 
 who is primarily responsible for providing the 
 services. Additional periods of services are covered 
 only if such person determines that the requirement in 
 paragraph (1) is satisfied.
 (B) Qualified rehabilitation health professional.--
 Periodically, outpatient rehabilitation services 
 described in paragraph (2) shall be reevaluated by a 
 qualified rehabilitation health professional.

SEC. 1115. DURABLE MEDICAL EQUIPMENT, PROSTHETIC DEVICES, ORTHOTICS, 
 AND PROSTHETICS.

 (a) Coverage.--The items and services described in this section 
are--
 (1) durable medical equipment;
 (2) prosthetic devices (other than dental devices) which 
 replace all or part of the function of an internal body organ 
 (including devices that are surgically inserted, devices that 
 are physically attached to the body, such as colostomy bags and 
 supplies directly related to colostomy care, and external 
 devices);
 (3) orthotics (leg, arm, back and neck braces) and 
 prosthetics (artificial legs, arms and eyes);
 (4)(A) accessories and supplies which are used directly 
 with equipment or devices described in paragraphs (1) through 
 (3) to achieve the therapeutic benefits of such equipment or 
 devices or to assure the proper functioning of such equipment 
 or device;
 (B) replacement of such equipment or devices when required 
 in cases of loss irreparable damage, wear, or because of a 
 change in the patient's condition; and
 (C) repair and maintenance of such equipment and devices; 
 and
 (5) fitting (including adjustments) and training for use of 
 the items described in paragraphs (1) through (4).
 (b) Limitation.--An item or service described in this section is 
covered only if it improves functional ability or prevents or minimizes 
deterioration in function.
 (c) Durable Medical Equipment.--For purposes of this subtitle, the 
term ``durable medical equipment'' has the meaning given such term in 
section 1861(n) of the Social Security Act.

SEC. 1116. VISION CARE.

 (a) Coverage.--The vision care described in this section is routine 
eye examinations, diagnosis, and treatment for defects in vision.
 (b) Limitation.--Eyeglasses and contact lenses are covered only for 
individuals less than 18 years of age, according to a periodicity 
schedule established by the Board.

SEC. 1117. HEARING AIDS FOR CHILDREN.

 The items described in this section are hearing aids for 
individuals up to age 18 when recommended by a physician or 
audiologist.

SEC. 1118. DENTAL CARE.

 (a) Coverage.--The dental care described in this section is the 
following:
 (1) Emergency dental treatment, including simple 
 extractions, for acute infections, bleeding, and injuries to 
 natural teeth and oral structures for conditions requiring 
 immediate attention to prevent risks to life or significant 
 medical complications, as specified by the National Health 
 Board.
 (2) Prevention and diagnosis of dental disease, including 
 oral dental examinations, radiographs, dental sealants, 
 fluoride application, and dental prophylaxis.
 (3) Treatment of dental disease, including routine 
 fillings, prosthetics for genetic defects, periodontal 
 maintenance, and endodontic services.
 (4) Space maintenance procedures to prevent orthodontic 
 complications.
 (5) Interceptive orthodontic treatment to prevent severe 
 malocclusion.
 (b) Limitations.--Coverage for dental care is subject to the 
following limitations:
 (1) Prior to January 1, 2001, the items and services 
 described in paragraphs (2) and (3) of subsection (a) are 
 covered only for individuals less than 18 years of age. On or 
 after such date, such items and services are covered for all 
 eligible individuals enrolled under a health plan, except that 
 dental sealants and endodontic services are not covered for 
 individuals 18 years of age or older.
 (2) The items and services described in subsection (a)(4) 
 are covered only for individuals at least 3 years of age but 
 less than 13 years of age when determined to be medically 
 necessary or appropriate to prevent future need for more costly 
 services otherwise covered under this section.
 (3) Prior to January 1, 2001, the items and services 
 described in subsection (a)(5) are not covered. On or after 
 such date, such items and services are covered only for 
 individuals at least 6 years of age, but less than 12 years of 
 age.

SEC. 1119. INVESTIGATIONAL TREATMENTS.

 (a) Coverage.--The items and services described in this section are 
qualifying investigational treatments (as defined in subsection (c)) 
that are administered for a disease, disorder, or other health 
conditions. A health plan shall allow individuals, when medically 
appropriate, to participate in an investigational therapy, and shall 
cover the patient care provided pursuant to investigational treatments 
as described in subsection (b).
 (b) Patient Care During Investigational Treatments.--The 
comprehensive benefit package includes an item or service described in 
any other section of this part, subject to the limitations and cost 
sharing requirements applicable to the item or service, when the item 
or service is provided to an individual in the course of an 
investigational treatment, if--
 (1) the treatment is a qualifying investigational 
 treatment; and
 (2) the item or service is required to provide patient care 
 pursuant to the design of the trial, except those services 
 normally paid for by other funding sources (as defined by the 
 National Health Board) such as the cost of the investigational 
 agent or device itself, and the costs of managing the research.
Items or services subject to the exception in paragraph (2), may be 
covered in addition to patient care at the discretion of the health 
plan so long as the plan makes a determination based on objective 
protocols applied consistently to all enrollees.
 (c) Definitions.--For purposes of this subtitle:
 (1) Qualifying investigational treatment.--The term 
 ``qualifying investigational treatment'' means a treatment--
 (A) the effectiveness of which has not been 
 determined; and
 (B) that is under clinical investigation as part of 
 an approved research trial.
 (2) Approved research trial.--The term ``approved research 
 trial'' means--
 (A) a research trial approved by the Secretary of 
 Health and Human Services, the Director of the National 
 Institutes of Health, the Commissioner of the Food and 
 Drug Administration, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, 
 the Secretary of Defense, or a qualified 
 nongovernmental research entity as defined in 
 guidelines of the National Institutes of Health; or
 (B) a peer-reviewed and approved research program, 
 as defined by the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services, conducted for the primary purpose of 
 determining whether or not a treatment is safe, 
 efficacious, or having any other characteristic of a 
 treatment which must be demonstrated in order for the 
 treatment to be medically necessary or appropriate.
 Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting the 
 authority of the Commissioner of Food and Drugs over clinical 
 investigations of products within the Commissioner's 
 jurisdiction.

SEC. 1120. OPTIONAL SERVICES.

 (a) Health Education.--Health education and training programs, 
including community-based programs, may be provided at the discretion 
of the health plan to encourage the reduction of behavioral risk 
factors and to promote health activities. Such education and training 
programs may include smoking cessation, nutrition counseling, stress 
management, support groups, and physical training classes. This 
subsection shall not be construed to include or limit education or 
training that is provided in the course of the delivery of health 
professional services under section 1102. Health care providers may 
refer plan members to health education programs that best meet their 
needs based on an assessment of individual risks and learning styles. 
Health plans shall inform health providers about the availability of 
such health education programs annually, either at the time of paying 
the first claim to that provider, or in the case of a network plan, at 
the time of contracting with the provider.
 (b) Extra Contractual Services.--
 (1) In general.--A health plan may provide coverage to 
 individuals enrolled under the plan for extra contractual items 
 and services determined appropriate by the plan and the 
 individual (or in appropriate circumstances the parent or legal 
 guardian of the individual).
 (2) Definition.--As used in this section, the term ``extra 
 contractual items and services'' means, with respect to a 
 health plan, case management services and those medically 
 appropriate alternatives (either alternative items or services 
 or alternative care settings) to traditional covered items or 
 services that are determined by the health plan to be the most 
 cost effective way to provide appropriate treatment to the 
 enrolled individual.
 (c) Disputed Claims.--A decision by a health plan to permit or deny 
the provision of optional services shall not be subject to a benefit 
discrimination review or other review unless such review involves a 
claim of discrimination under this Act.

 PART 2--COST SHARING

SEC. 1131. COST SHARING.

 (a) In General.--Each health plan shall offer to individuals 
enrolled under the plan one, but not more than one, of the following 
cost sharing schedules, which schedule shall be offered to all such 
enrollees:
 (1) Lower cost sharing (described in section 1132).
 (2) Higher cost sharing (described in section 1133).
 (3) Combination cost sharing (described in section 1134).
 (b) Cost Sharing for Low-Income Families.--For provisions relating 
to reducing cost sharing for certain low-income families, see section 
1281.
 (c) Deductibles, Cost Sharing, and Out-of-Pocket Limits on Cost 
Sharing.--
 (1) Application on an annual basis.--The deductibles and 
 out-of-pocket limits on cost sharing for a year under the 
 schedules referred to in subsection (a) shall be applied based 
 upon expenses incurred for items and services furnished in the 
 year.
 (2) Individual and family general deductibles.--
 (A) Individual.--Subject to subparagraph (B), with 
 respect to an individual enrolled under a health plan 
 (regardless of the class of enrollment), any individual 
 general deductible in the cost sharing schedule offered 
 by the plan represents the amount of countable expenses 
 (as defined in subparagraph (C)) that the individual 
 may be required to incur in a year before the plan 
 incurs liability for expenses for such items and 
 services furnished to the individual.
 (B) Family.--In the case of an individual enrolled 
 under a health plan under a family class of enrollment 
 (as defined in section 1011(c)(2)(A)), the individual 
 general deductible under subparagraph (A) shall not 
 apply to countable expenses incurred by any member of 
 the individual's family in a year at such time as the 
 family has incurred, in the aggregate, countable 
 expenses in the amount of the family general deductible 
 for the year.
 (C) Countable expense.--In this paragraph, the term 
 ``countable expense'' means, with respect to an 
 individual for a year, an expense for an item or 
 service covered by the comprehensive benefit package 
 that is subject to the general deductible and for 
 which, but for such deductible and any other cost 
 sharing under this subtitle, a health plan is liable 
 for payment. The amount of countable expenses for an 
 individual for a year under this paragraph shall not 
 exceed the individual general deductible for the year.
 (3) Coinsurance and copayments.--After a general or 
 separate deductible that applies to an item or service covered 
 by the comprehensive benefit package has been satisfied for a 
 year, subject to paragraph (4), coinsurance and copayments are 
 amounts (expressed as a percentage of an amount otherwise 
 payable or as a dollar amount, respectively) that an individual 
 may be required to pay with respect to the item or service.
 (4) Individual and family limits on cost sharing.--
 (A) Individual.--Subject to subparagraph (B), with 
 respect to an individual enrolled under a health plan 
 (regardless of the class of enrollment), the individual 
 out-of-pocket limit on cost sharing in the cost sharing 
 schedule offered by the plan represents the amount of 
 expenses that the individual may be required to incur 
 under the plan in a year because of a general 
 deductible, separate deductibles, copayments, and 
 coinsurance before the plan may no longer impose any 
 cost sharing with respect to items or services covered 
 by the comprehensive benefit package that are provided 
 to the individual.
 (B) Family.--In the case of an individual enrolled 
 under a health plan under a family class of enrollment 
 (as defined in section 1011(c)(2)(A)), the family out-
 of-pocket limit on cost sharing in the cost sharing 
 schedule offered by the plan represents the amount of 
 expenses that members of the individual's family, in 
 the aggregate, may be required to incur under the plan 
 in a year because of a general deductible, separate 
 deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance before the 
 plan may no longer impose any cost sharing with respect 
 to items or services covered by the comprehensive 
 benefit package that are provided to any member of the 
 individual's family.
 (C) Amount of out of pocket limits.--The amount of 
 the out of pocket limit described--
 (i) in subparagraph (A) is $2,500, and
 (ii) in subparagraph (B), is $3,000.

SEC. 1132. LOWER COST SHARING.

 (a) In General.--The lower cost sharing schedule referred to in 
section 1131 that is offered by a health plan--
 (1) shall have a deductible of $250 per inpatient hospital 
 admission, and shall not have any other required deductibles;
 (2) except as provided in paragraph (4)--
 (A) shall prohibit payment of any coinsurance; and
 (B) subject to section 1152, shall require payment 
 of the copayment for items or services as follows--
 (i) for items and services described in 
 sections 1102(a)(1), 1104, 1105, 1106(g)(1)(H), 
 1107, 1108, 1109, 1110, 1111, 1112, 1115, 1117, 
 and for clinician visits and associated 
 services related to prenatal care and one 
 postpartum visit, no copayment is permitted;
 (ii) for items and services described in 
 sections 1102(a)(2), 1103, 1106 (subject to 
 clause (i)), 1113, 1114, 1115, and 1116, the 
 copayment is $10 per visit (or per prescription 
 in the case of items described in section 
 1113);
 (iii) for services described in section 
 1118(a)(4) and 1118(a)(5), the copayment is $20 
 per visit;
 (iv) for items and services described in 
 section 1102(a)(3) and 1104, the copayment is 
 $25 per visit unless the patient has an 
 emergency medical condition as defined in 
 section 1867(e)(1) of the Social Security Act; 
 and
 (v) for items and services described in 
 sections 1119, all cost sharing rules shall be 
 determined by the health plans; and
 (3) shall require payment of coinsurance for an out-of-
 network item or service (as defined in section 1502(f)) in an 
 amount that is a percentage (determined under subsection (b)) 
 of the applicable payment rate for the item or service 
 established under section 1211(b), but only if the item or 
 service is subject to coinsurance under the higher cost sharing 
 schedule described in section 1133 or is a clinical preventive 
 service as defined in section 1104.
 (b) Out-of-Network Coinsurance Percentage.--
 (1) In general.--The National Health Board shall determine 
 a percentage referred to in subsection (a)(3). The percentage--
 (A) may not be less than 20 percent; and
 (B) shall be the same with respect to all out-of-
 network items and services that are subject to 
 coinsurance, except as provided in paragraph (2).
 (2) Exception.--The National Health Board may provide for a 
 percentage that is greater than a percentage determined under 
 paragraph (1) in the case of an out-of-network item or service 
 for which, under the higher cost sharing schedule described in 
 section 1133, the coinsurance is greater than 20 percent of the 
 applicable payment rate.

SEC. 1133. HIGHER COST SHARING.

 The higher cost sharing schedule referred to in section 1131 that 
is offered by a health plan--
 (1) shall have an annual individual general deductible of 
 $200 and an annual family general deductible of $400 that apply 
 with respect to expenses incurred for all items and services in 
 the comprehensive benefit package except--
 (A) an item or service with respect to which a 
 separate individual deductible applies under paragraph 
 (2); or
 (B) an item or service described in paragraph (3), 
 (4), or (5) with respect to which a deductible does not 
 apply;
 (2) shall require an individual to incur expenses in a year 
 for outpatient prescription drugs and biologicals (described in 
 section 1113) equal to $250 before the plan provides benefits 
 for such items to the individual;
 (3) shall require an individual to incur expenses in a year 
 for dental care described in section 1118, except the items and 
 services for prevention and diagnosis of dental disease 
 described in section 1118(a)(2), equal to $50 before the plan 
 provides benefits for such care to the individual;
 (4) may not require any deductible for clinical preventive 
 services (described in section 1105);
 (5) may not require any deductible for family planning 
 services as defined in section 1107(1), clinician visits and 
 associated services related to prenatal care or 1 post-partum 
 visit under section 1107;
 (6) may not require any deductible for the items and 
 services for prevention and diagnosis of dental disease 
 described in section 1126(a)(2);
 (7) shall prohibit payment of any copayment; and
 (8) subject to section 1152, shall require payment of 
 coinsurance for an item or service as follows--
 (A) for items and services described in section 
 1105, family planning services and clinical visits and 
 associated services related to prenatal care and one 
 post partum visit, and case management services under 
 section 1106, no coinsurance is permitted;
 (B) for items and services described in section 
 1118(a)(4) and 1118(a)(5), the coinsurance is 40 
 percent of the applicable payment rate;
 (C) for outpatient services under section 
 1106(g)(1)(G)--
 (i) the coinsurance with respect to the 
 first five outpatient psychotherapy visits is 
 20 percent of the applicable payment rate;
 (ii) the coinsurance with respect to any 
 subsequent outpatient psychotherapy visits is 
 50 percent of the applicable payment rate; and
 (iii) the coinsurance with respect to 
 children for outpatient psychotherapy visits is 
 20 percent of the applicable payment rate; and
 (D) for all other items and services, the 
 coinsurance is 20 percent of the applicable payment 
 rate.
For purposes of this section, the term ``applicable payment rate'', 
when used with respect to an item or service, means the applicable 
payment rate for the item or service established under section 1523(e).

SEC. 1134. COMBINATION COST SHARING.

 (a) In General.--The combination cost sharing schedule referred to 
in section 1131 that is offered by a health plan shall require 
different cost sharing for in-network items and services than for out-
of-network items and services.
 (b) In-Network Items and Services.--With respect to an in-network 
item or service (as defined in section 1514(c)(1)), the combination 
cost sharing schedule that is offered by a health plan--
 (1) shall have a deductible of $250 per inpatient hospital 
 admission, and shall not have any other required deductibles;
 (2) shall prohibit payment of any coinsurance; and
 (3) shall require payment of a copayment in accordance with 
 the lower cost sharing schedule described in section 1132.
 (c) Out-of-Network Items and Services.--With respect to an out-of-
network item or service (as defined in section 1514(c)(2)), the 
combination cost sharing schedule that is offered by a health plan--
 (1) shall require an individual and a family to incur 
 expenses before the plan provides benefits for the item or 
 service in accordance with the deductibles under the higher 
 cost sharing schedule described in section 1133;
 (2) shall prohibit payment of any copayment; and
 (3) shall require payment of coinsurance in accordance with 
 such schedule, except with respect to clinical preventive 
 services obtained out-of-network that shall be subject to a 
 coinsurance percentage as determined by the National Health 
 Board under section 1132.

SEC. 1135. INDEXING DOLLAR AMOUNTS RELATING TO COST SHARING.

 (a) In General.--Any deductible, copayment, out-of-pocket limit on 
cost sharing, or other amount expressed in dollars in this subtitle for 
items or services provided in a year after 1994 shall be such amount 
increased by the product of the factors described in subsection (b) for 
the year and for each previous year after 1994, minus 1. Any increase 
(or decrease) under this subsection shall be rounded.
 (b) Factor.--
 (1) In general.--The factor described in this subsection 
 for a year is 1 plus the general health care inflation factor 
 (as specified in section 6001(a)(3) and determined under 
 paragraph (2)) for the year.
 (2) Determination.--In computing such factor for a year, 
 the percentage increase in the CPI for a year (referred to in 
 section 6001(b)) shall be determined based upon the percentage 
 increase in the average of the CPI for the 12-month period 
 ending with August 31 of the previous year over such average 
 for the preceding 12-month period.

 PART 3--EXCLUSIONS

SEC. 1141. EXCLUSIONS.

 (a) Medical Necessity.--The comprehensive benefit package does not 
include--
 (1) an item or service that is not medically necessary or 
 appropriate; or
 (2) an item or service that the National Health Board may 
 determine is not medically necessary or appropriate in a 
 regulation promulgated under section 1154.
 (b) Additional Exclusions.--The comprehensive benefit package does 
not include the following items and services:
 (1) Custodial care, except in the case of hospice care 
 under section 1107.
 (2) Surgery and other procedures performed solely for 
 cosmetic purposes and hospital or other services incident 
 thereto, unless--
 (A) required to correct a congenital anomaly; or
 (B) required to restore or correct a part of the 
 body that has been altered as a result of--
 (i) accidental injury;
 (ii) disease; or
 (iii) surgery that is otherwise covered 
 under this subtitle.
 (3) Hearing aids, except as provided in section 1117.
 (4) Eyeglasses and contact lenses for individuals at least 
 18 years of age.
 (5) In vitro fertilization services.
 (6) Sex change surgery and related services.
 (7) Private duty nursing.
 (8) Personal comfort items, except in the case of hospice 
 care under section 1107.
 (9) Any dental procedures involving orthodontic care, 
 inlays, gold or platinum fillings, bridges, crowns, pin/post 
 retention, dental implants, surgical periodontal procedures, or 
 the preparation of the mouth for the fitting or continued use 
 of dentures, except as specifically described in section 1118.

 PART 4--ROLE OF THE NATIONAL HEALTH BOARD

SEC. 1151. DEFINITION OF BENEFITS.

 (a) In General.--The National Health Board may promulgate such 
regulations or establish such guidelines as may be necessary to assure 
uniformity in the application of the comprehensive benefit package 
across all health plans. All plans shall comply with any regulation or 
guidelines established by the Board under this section.
 (b) Flexibility in Delivery.--The regulations or guidelines under 
subsection (a) shall permit a health plan to deliver covered items and 
services to individuals enrolled under the plan using the providers and 
methods that the plan determines to be appropriate and consistent with 
standards of quality care and so long as the plan complies with the 
provisions of this Act.

SEC. 1152. ACCELERATION OF EXPANDED BENEFITS.

 (a) In General.--Subject to subsection (b), at any time prior to 
January 1, 2001, the National Health Board, in its discretion, may by 
regulation expand the comprehensive benefit package by--
 (1) adding any item or service that is added to the package 
 as of January 1, 2001; and
 (2) requiring that a cost sharing schedule described in 
 part 2 of this subtitle reflect (wholly or in part) any of the 
 cost sharing requirements that apply to the schedule as of 
 January 1, 2001.
No such expansion shall be effective except as of January 1 of a year.
 (b) Condition.--The Board may not expand the benefit package under 
subsection (a) which is to become effective with respect to a year, by 
adding any item or service or altering any cost sharing schedule, 
unless the Board estimates that the additional increase in per capita 
health care expenditures resulting from the addition or alteration, for 
each health care coverage area for the year, will not cause any health 
care coverage area to exceed its per capita target (as determined under 
section 6003).

SEC. 1153. AUTHORITY WITH RESPECT TO CLINICAL PREVENTIVE SERVICES.

 (a) In General.--With respect to clinical preventive services 
described in section 1104, the National Health Board--
 (1) shall specify and define specific items and services as 
 clinical preventive services for high risk populations within 1 
 year of the date of enactment of this Act and shall establish 
 and update a periodicity schedule for such items and services;
 (2) shall establish and update periodicity schedules for 
 the age-appropriate immunizations;
 (3) shall establish a periodicity schedule for age 
 appropriate tests and clinician visits for individuals under 
 the age of 20;
 (4) shall establish rules with respect to coverage for an 
 immunization, test, or clinician visit that is not provided to 
 an individual during the age range for such immunization, test, 
 or clinician visit that is specified in such section; and
 (5) may otherwise modify the items and services described 
 in such section, taking into account age and other risk 
 factors, but may not modify the cost sharing for any such item 
 or service.
 (b) Consultation.--In performing the functions described in 
subsection (a), the National Health Board shall consult with experts in 
clinical preventive services, including those specified in section 
1105.

SEC. 1154. ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS REGARDING MEDICAL NECESSITY.

 The National Health Board may promulgate such regulations as may be 
necessary to carry out section 1141(a)(2) (relating to the exclusion of 
certain services that are not medically necessary or appropriate).

SEC. 1155. BALANCE BILLING.

 The Board shall provide for methods to ensure the prohibition of 
balance billing.

 PART 5--ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS

SEC. 1161. OVERRIDE OF RESTRICTIVE STATE PRACTICE LAWS.

 No State may, through licensure or otherwise, restrict the practice 
of any class of health professionals beyond what is justified by the 
skills and training of such professionals.

SEC. 1162. PROVISION OF ITEMS OR SERVICES CONTRARY TO RELIGIOUS BELIEF 
 OR MORAL CONVICTION.

 A health professional or a health facility may not be required to 
provide an item or service in the comprehensive benefit package if the 
professional or facility objects to doing so on the basis of a 
religious belief or moral conviction.

SEC. 1163. DUTY TO DISCLOSE INCORRECT TEST RESULTS.

 (a) In General.--Any facility, including hospitals, clinics, and 
clinical laboratories, which provides diagnostic testing or other 
health care items or services covered under this Act shall promptly 
notify the individual provider who ordered the test of any errors in 
the test results. The individual provider who ordered the test must 
promptly notify the patient of the error if the new results affect the 
patient's diagnosis or treatment.
 (b) Regulations.--To carry out subsection (a), the Secretary shall 
promptly issue proposed regulations, and within 9 months of the date of 
enactment of this Act shall issue final regulations.

 Subtitle C--State Responsibilities

SEC. 1200. PARTICIPATING STATE.

 (a) In General.--For purposes of the approval of a State health 
care system by the Board under section 1611, a State is a 
``participating State'' if the State meets the applicable requirements 
of this subtitle.
 (b) Submission of System Document.--
 (1) In general.--In order to be approved as a participating 
 State under section 1611, a State shall submit to the National 
 Health Board a document (in a form and manner specified by the 
 Board) that describes the State health care system that the 
 State is establishing (or has established).
 (2) Deadline.--If a State is not a participating State with 
 a State health care system in operation by January 1, 1998, the 
 provisions of subpart C of part 1 of subtitle F (relating to 
 responsibilities in absence of State systems) shall take 
 effect.
 (3) Submission of information subsequent to approval.--A 
 State approved as a participating State under section 1611 
 shall submit to the Board an annual update to the State health 
 care system not later than February 15 of each year following 
 the first year for which the State is a participating State. 
 The update shall contain--
 (A) such information as the Board may require to 
 determine that the system shall meet the applicable 
 requirements of this Act for the succeeding year; and
 (B) such information as the Board may require to 
 determine that the State operated the system during the 
 previous year in accordance with the Board's approval 
 of the system for such previous year.

 PART 1--GENERAL STATE RESPONSIBILITIES

SEC. 1201. GENERAL STATE RESPONSIBILITIES.

 A participating State is responsible for:
 (1) Health care coverage area.--Establishing one or more 
 health care coverage areas (in accordance with section 1202).
 (2) Health plans.--Certifying and overseeing health plans 
 in accordance with subtitle F.
 (3) Providers.--Assessing such licensing fees as may be 
 necessary to adequately fund State health profession boards. 
 (Nothing in this paragraph shall preempt State authority to 
 license or register health care providers.) State health 
 professional boards shall--
 (A) investigate complaints with a reasonable 
 probability of validity, and issue appropriate 
 sanctions;
 (B) have adequate public, consumer, and non-
 physician representatives; and
 (C) report all final disciplinary actions to the 
 National Practitioner Data Bank.
 (4) Premium adjustment.--Administering risk adjustment, 
 reinsurance and other premium adjustment programs consistent 
 with this Act.
 (5) Reductions in cost sharing.--Administering reductions 
 in cost sharing in accordance wuth section 1281 and 1282 and a 
 premium discount program in accordance with subtitle B of title 
 VI.
 (6) Cooperatives.--Certification of at least one consumer 
 purchasing cooperative in each area, consistent with the 
 provisions of subtitle D.
 (7) Other responsibilities.--Carrying out all other 
 responsibilities of participating States specified under this 
 Act.

SEC. 1202. ASSURING COMMUNITY-RATED PREMIUMS THROUGH ESTABLISHMENT OF 
 HEALTH CARE COVERAGE AREAS.

 (a) In General.--In accordance with this section, a participating 
State shall provide for the division of the State into 1 or more health 
care coverage areas.
 (b) Multiple Areas.--With respect to a health care coverage area--
 (1) no metropolitan statistical area in a State may be 
 incorporated into more than 1 such area in the State;
 (2) the number of individuals residing within such an area 
 may not be less than 150,000; and
 (3) no area incorporated in a health care coverage area may 
 be incorporated into another such area.
 (c) Boundaries.--
 (1) In general.--In establishing boundaries for health care 
 coverage areas, a State shall comply with the 
 antidiscrimination requirements of section 1914.
 (2) Coordinating multiple health care coverage areas.--
 Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing a 
 State from coordinating the activities of one or more health 
 care coverage areas in the State.
 (3) Interstate health care coverage areas.--Health care 
 coverage areas with respect to interstate areas shall be 
 established in accordance with rules established by the Board.
 (4) Coordination in multi-state areas.--One or more States 
 may coordinate their operations in contiguous health care 
 coverage areas. Such coordination may include, the following 
 activities, adoption of joint operating rules, contracting with 
 health plans, enforcement activities, and establishment of fee 
 schedules for health providers.

SEC. 1203. USE OF INCENTIVES.

 (a) Use of Incentives to Enroll and Serve Disadvantaged Groups.--A 
State may provide--
 (1) for an additional adjustment to the risk-adjustment 
 methodology under section 1641(b), or in accordance with the 
 standards under section 1642, and other financial incentives to 
 community-rated health plans to ensure that such plans enroll 
 individuals who are members of disadvantaged groups or 
 populations vulnerable to discrimination due to their health 
 status, and
 (2) for appropriate extra services, such as outreach to 
 encourage enrollment and transportation and interpreting 
 services to ensure access to care, for certain population 
 groups that face barriers to access because of geographic 
 location, income levels, disability or racial or cultural 
 differences.
 (b) Use of Incentives to Address Needs in Areas with Inadequate 
Health Services.--
 (1) Payment adjustment.--To ensure that plans are available 
 to all eligible individuals residing in all portions of a 
 health care coverage area, a State may adjust payments to plans 
 or use other financial incentives to encourage health plans to 
 expand into areas that have inadequate health services.
 (2) Encouraging new plans.--Subject to section 1202(c), to 
 encourage the establishment of a new health plan in an area 
 that has inadequate health services, a State may--
 (A) organize health providers to create such a plan 
 in such an area that is targeted at such area;
 (B) provide assistance with the establishment and 
 administration of such a plan; and
 (C) arrange favorable financing for such a plan.

SEC. 1204. RESTRICTIONS ON FUNDING OF ADDITIONAL BENEFITS.

 If a participating State provides benefits (either directly or 
through community-rated health plans or otherwise) in addition to those 
covered under the comprehensive benefit package, the State may not 
provide for payment for such benefits through funds provided under this 
Act.

SEC. 1205. CONSUMER INFORMATION AND MARKETING.

 (a) Consumer Information.--Before each open enrollment period, each 
State shall ensure the availability to eligible enrollees of 
information, in an easily understood and useful form, that allows such 
enrollees (and other community-rate eligible individuals) to make valid 
comparisons among community-rated health plans and veterans and 
Uniformed Services health plans offered in the State, including 
information about plan price, the characteristics and availability of 
participating health professionals and institutions, any restrictions 
on access to providers or services and a summary of the annual quality 
performance report described in section 5005. Such information shall be 
made available in a brochure, published not less often than annually, 
in accordance with section 1603(e). In the case of a health care 
coverage area that includes a significant number or proportion of 
residents with limited English speaking proficiency, the State shall 
ensure the availability of all written materials in languages other 
than English as appropriate to the health care coverage area.
 (b) Marketing.--Each participating State shall ensure that health 
plans meet the marketing requirements under section 1515.

SEC. 1206. STATE RESPONSIBILITIES WITH RESPECT TO WORKSITE HEALTH 
 PROMOTION DISCOUNTS.

 Each State shall provide for the administration of wellness 
discounts in accordance with rules established by the Secretary in 
accordance with section 1687. Such duties shall include the receipt of 
employer self-certification forms, enforcement of compliance, dispute 
resolution and implementation of wellness discounts in a manner 
consistent with section 1687.

SEC. 1207. CONSUMER ADVOCATE.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall establish (by grant or 
contract) and oversee a National Center of Consumer Advocacy to provide 
technical assistance, adequate training and support to States and 
Offices of Consumer Advocacy in each State (hereafter referred to in 
this section as the ``Office'') to carry out the duties of this 
section, including providing public education to consumers concerning 
this Act. The National Center of Consumer Advocacy shall be a national 
non-profit organization with public education and health policy 
expertise and shall have sufficient staff to carry out its duties and a 
demonstrated ability to represent and work with a broad spectrum of 
consumers, including vulnerable and under served populations. The 
Office in each State shall perform public outreach and provide 
education and assistance regarding consumer rights and responsibilities 
under this Act, and assist consumers in dealing with problems that 
arise with consumer purchasing cooperatives, large group purchasers, 
health plans, and health care providers operating in such State.
 (b) Contracts.--
 (1) Solicitation.--The Secretary shall solicit contracts 
 from private non-profit organizations to fulfill the duties of 
 the Office in the State. The Secretary may develop such 
 regulations and guidelines as necessary to oversee the process 
 of considering and awarding competitive contracts under this 
 section. In awarding such contracts, the Secretary shall 
 consult with the State and National Center of Consumer 
 Advocacy, and shall, at a minimum, consider the demonstrated 
 ability of the organization to represent and work with a broad 
 spectrum of consumers, including vulnerable and underserved 
 populations.
 (2) Contract period.--The contract period for the State 
 Offices of Consumer Advocacy and the National Center of 
 Consumer Advocacy under this section shall be not less than 4 
 years and not more than 7 years.
 (c) Functions and Responsibilities.--Each Office shall have 
sufficient staff, local offices throughout the State, and a State-wide 
toll-free hotline to carry out the duties of this section. Through 
direct contact and the hotline, the Office shall provide the following 
services in the State, including appropriate assistance to individuals 
with limited English language ability--
 (1) outreach and education relating to consumer rights and 
 responsibilities under this Act, including such rights and 
 services available through the Office;
 (2) assistance with enrollment in health plans, or 
 obtaining services or reimbursement from health plans;
 (3) assistance with filing an application for premium or 
 cost sharing subsidies;
 (4) information to enrollees about existing grievance 
 procedures and coordination with other entities to assist in 
 identifying, investigating, and resolving enrollee grievances 
 under this Act (including grievances before State medical 
 boards);
 (5) regular and timely access in the area to the services 
 provided through the Office and its local offices and timely 
 responses from representatives of the Office to complaints;
 (6) referrals to appropriate local providers of legal 
 assistance and to appropriate State and Federal agencies which 
 may be of assistance to aggrieved individuals in the area; and
 (7) conduct public hearings no less frequently than once a 
 year to identify and address community health care needs.
 (d) Access to Information.--The Secretary and the States shall 
ensure that, for purposes of carrying out the Office's duties under 
this section, the Office (and officers and employees of the Office in 
local offices) have appropriate access to relevant information subject 
to protections for confidentiality of enrollee information.
 (e) Evaluation and Report.--The Secretary shall have the right to 
evaluate the quality and effectiveness of the organization in carrying 
out the functions specified in the contract. The Office shall report to 
the Secretary and the State annually on the nature and patterns of 
consumer complaints received in the Office and its local offices during 
each year and any policy, regulatory, and legislative recommendations 
for needed improvements together with a record of the activities of the 
Office.
 (f) Funding.--The funding for the establishment of an Office in 
each State is specified in section 1213, of which $5,000,000 shall be 
for the National Center for Consumer Advocacy.
 (g) Conflicts of Interest.--The Secretary shall ensure that no 
individual involved in the designation of the Office, the Office 
itself, or of any delegate thereof is subject to a conflict of 
interest, including affiliation with (through ownership or common 
control) a health care facility, managed care organization, health 
insurance company or association of health care facilities or 
providers. No grantee under this part may have a direct involvement 
with the licensing, certification, or accreditation of a health care 
facility, a health care plan, or a provider of health care services.
 (h) Legal Counsel.--The Secretary shall ensure that adequate legal 
counsel is available, and is able, without conflict of interest, to 
assist the Office, and the local offices thereof in the performance of 
their official duties.
 (i) Coordination.--The Office shall coordinate its activities with 
all appropriate entities including Quality Improvement Foundations 
(established under section 5008) and the State's long term care 
ombudsman or other agency esignated to carry out client advocacy 
activities pursuant to section 2106.
 (j) Construction.--Nothing in this section shall replace grievance 
procedures established or otherwise required under this Act.

SEC. 1208. ELECTION PROCEDURE FOR COMMUNITY-RATED EMPLOYERS.

 (a) In General.--Each participating State shall establish a 
procedure (consistent with rules established by the Board) through 
which exempt employers, as defined in section 6117, may make an 
election to be treated as a community-rated employer. Such procedure 
shall set forth the form and manner that such election shall be made.
 (b) Notification.--The procedure shall require that employees of a 
exempt employer are notified of an election or a termination of an 
election under this section prior to the first annual open enrollment 
period (as defined in section 1660) following such election or 
termination.
 (c) Termination.--The procedures shall permit exempt employers to 
terminate an election made under this section. If an employer 
terminates an election, the termination shall be effective on the first 
date of the year following such termination.

SEC. 1209. COORDINATED HEALTH CARE SERVICES FOR CHILDREN.

 (a) Designation of State Agency.--The State shall designate an 
agency (hereafter referred to in this as the ``lead agency'') to 
coordinate the delivery of medical and social services to children with 
special health care needs. The lead agency shall:
 (1) Serve as an information resource for children with 
 special health care needs and their families and health 
 providers, providing technical assistance regarding available 
 specialty and support services and referral networks for these 
 children and their families.
 (2) Coordinate activities with all other State agencies 
 which provide services to children with special health care 
 needs and their families, and establish mechanisms to identify 
 and maximize resources available for these children and 
 families.
 (3) Provide assistance to the State in fulfilling functions 
 under section 1201 in certifying and monitoring the performance 
 of health plans in delivering appropriate services to children 
 in a timely and efficient manner.
 (4) Make recommendations to States, plans, and providers to 
 identify what services are lacking for children with special 
 health care needs.
 (b) Provision of Activities.--The lead agency shall provide the 
activities under subsection (a) for all children with special health 
care needs or children under foster care who are referred by a 
qualified health plan, other health or social service provider, or 
publicly funded programs where children receive services.

SEC. 1210. STATE RESPONSIBILITIES FOR UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT.

 (a) In General.--A State shall certify or recertify a health plan 
only if the State reviews the utilization management activities of the 
plan and determines that such activities meet the standards described 
in subsection (b), or such other standards as the National Health Board 
or other appropriate Federal agency may determine.
 (b) Standards Described.--The standards described in this 
subsection are as follows:
 (1) A health plan may not employ or contract with a 
 utilization management organization or utilization management 
 reviewer whose conditions of employment or contract terms 
 include reducing or limiting medically necessary or appropriate 
 services provided to individuals enrolled in a health plan.
 (2) Each health plan shall disclose to a participating 
 provider or an enrollee, upon request, the utilization review 
 protocols for controlling utilization and costs used to review 
 a plan of treatment recommended by the provider, and shall 
 provide a description of plan protocols for controlling 
 utilization and costs upon request to providers, enrollees, and 
 prospective enrollees.
 (3) Each health plan shall describe to an enrollee, 
 prospective enrollee, or participating provider, upon request, 
 the type of financial arrangements, if any, used by the plan 
 for controlling utilization and costs.
 (4) The protocols described in paragraph (2) shall be 
 applied consistently among utilization management reviewers 
 within any and each utilization management organization with 
 which a plan contracts.
 (5) Utilization management reviewers with whom a plan 
 contracts shall be available to consumers during normal 
 business hours for preauthorizations and other purposes, and 
 during non-business hours the health plan shall make available 
 a procedure for accessing medical care, preauthorization, or 
 other related services.

SEC. 1211. ASSURING FAMILY CHOICE OF HEALTH PLANS.

 (a) In General.--A participating State shall ensure that all 
community-rated individuals have a choice of health plans in which to 
enroll.
 (b) Guarantee of a Fee-for-Service Option.--
 (1) In general.--Each State shall ensure that at least one 
 fee-for-service plan (as defined in paragraph (2)) is offered 
 in each health care coverage area.
 (2) Fee-for-service plan defined.--
 (A) In general.--For purposes of this Act, the term 
 ``fee-for-service plan'' means a health plan that--
 (i) provides coverage for all items and 
 services included in the comprehensive benefit 
 package that are furnished by any lawful health 
 care provider of the enrollee's choice, subject 
 to reasonable restrictions (described in 
 subparagraph (B)), and
 (ii) makes payment to such a provider 
 without regard to whether or not there is a 
 contractual arrangement between the plan and 
 the provider.
 (B) Reasonable restrictions described.--The 
 reasonable restrictions on coverage permitted under a 
 fee-for-service plan (as specified by the National 
 Health Board) are as follows:
 (i) Utilization review.
 (ii) Prior approval for specified services.
 (iii) Exclusion of providers on the basis 
 of poor quality of care, based on evidence 
 obtainable by the plan.
 Clause (ii) shall not be construed as permitting a plan 
 to require prior approval for health care services 
 through a gatekeeper or other process for services that 
 are not specified for services that are not specified.
 (3) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this Act shall be 
 construed to prevent a health plan from providing for a 
 different basis or level of payment than the fee schedule 
 established under this section as part of a contractual 
 agreement with participating providers under the plan.

SEC. 1212. OVERSIGHT OF HEALTH PLAN ENROLLMENT ACTIVITIES.

 (a) In General.--Each participating State shall provide for the 
general oversight of health plan enrollment activities, implement 
regulations promulgated by the Board under section 1660, and assure 
that each community-rated individual who resides in the State is 
enrolled in a community-rated plan or other applicable health plan of 
the individual's choosing. In carrying out this subsection, States 
shall ensure that individuals are permitted to enroll directly in 
health plans of their choice.
 (b) Enrollment Through Providers.--Each State shall establish a 
mechanism for enrolling eligible individuals who are not enrolled in a 
plan when the individual seeks health services in accordance with rules 
promulgated by the Board.
 (c) Enforcement of Enrollment Requirement.--In the case of a 
community-rated individual who resides in a State and fails to enroll 
in an applicable health plan as required under section 1002(a) such 
State shall require the payment of an amount equal to twice the family 
share of premiums that would have been payable under subtitle B of 
title VI if the individual had enrolled on a timely basis in the plan, 
unless the individual establishes to the satisfaction of the State good 
cause or financial hardship for the failure to enroll on a timely 
basis. The State shall provide, from the amounts collected under 
paragraph (2), for payments to plans under subsection (b).

SEC. 1213. ADMINISTRATIVE ALLOWANCE PERCENTAGE.

 (a) Specification by State.--Before obtaining bids under section 
6004 from health plans for a year, each State shall establish the 
administrative allowance for State administrative functions with 
respect to the oversight of health plan activities, the determination 
of enrollment, the determination of subsidy eligibility, and other 
responsibilities under this Act.
 (b) Administrative Allowance Percentage.--Subject to subsection 
(c), the State shall compute an administrative allowance percentage for 
each year equal to--
 (1) the administrative allowance determined under 
 subsection (a) for the year, divided by
 (2) the total of the amounts payable to community-rated 
 health plans under subpart A (as estimated by the State).
 (c) Limitation to 1.5 percent.--In no case shall an administrative 
allowance percentage exceed 1.5 percent.
 (d) Distribution of Percentage.--The administrative allowance 
percentage shall be divided as follows:
 (1) 1.48 percent for State administrative functions, and
 (2) .02 percent for the Office of the Consumer Advocate 
 described in section 1207.
 (e) Receipt of Funds.--A State shall perform the duties required of 
States under this Act as a condition of receiving funds described in 
subsection (d)(1).

 PART 2--REQUIREMENTS FOR STATE SINGLE-PAYER SYSTEMS

SEC. 1221. SINGLE-PAYER SYSTEM DESCRIBED.

 The Board shall approve the application of a State to operate a 
single-payer system if the Board finds that the system--
 (1) meets the requirements of section 1222;
 (2)(A) meets the requirements for a Statewide single-payer 
 system under section 1223, in the case of a system offered 
 throughout a State; or
 (B) meets the requirements for an area specific single-
 payer system under section 1224, in the case of a system 
 offered in a single health care coverage area of a State.

SEC. 1222. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SINGLE-PAYER SYSTEMS.

 Each single-payer system shall meet the following requirements:
 (1) Establishment by state.--The system is established 
 under State law, and State law provides for mechanisms to 
 enforce the requirements of the system.
 (2) Operation by state.--The system is operated by the 
 State or a designated agency of the State.
 (3) Enrollment of eligible individuals.--
 (A) Mandatory enrollment of all community-rated 
 individuals.--The system provides for the enrollment of 
 all eligible individuals residing in the State (or, in 
 the case of an area-specific single-payer system, in 
 the health care coverage area) for whom the applicable 
 health plan would otherwise be a health care coverage 
 area health plan.
 (B) Optional enrollment of medicare-eligible 
 individuals.--At the option of the State, the system 
 may provide for the enrollment of Medicare-eligible 
 individuals residing in the State (or, in the case of 
 an area-specific single-payer system, in the health 
 care coverage area) if the Secretary of Health and 
 Human Services has approved an application submitted by 
 the State under section 1893 of the Social Security Act 
 (as added by section 4001(a)) for the integration of 
 Medicare beneficiaries into plans of the State. Nothing 
 in this subparagraph shall be construed as requiring 
 that a State have a single-payer system in order to 
 provide for such integration.
 (C) Optional enrollment of experience-rated 
 individuals in statewide plans.--At the option of the 
 State, a Statewide single-payer system may provide for 
 the enrollment of individuals residing in the State who 
 are otherwise eligible to enroll in an experience-rated 
 health plan under subtitle E.
 (D) Options included in state system document.--A 
 State may not exercise any of the options described in 
 subparagraphs (A) or (B) for a year unless the State 
 included a description of the option in the submission 
 of its system document to the Board for the year under 
 section 1200(b).
 (E) Exclusion of certain individuals.--A single-
 payer system may not require the enrollment of electing 
 veterans, active duty military personnel, and electing 
 American Indians (as defined in 1012(d)).
 (4) Direct payment to providers.--
 (A) In general.--With respect to providers who 
 furnish items and services included in the 
 comprehensive benefit package to individuals enrolled 
 in the system, the State shall make payments directly 
 to such providers and assume (subject to subparagraph 
 (B)) all financial risk associated with making such 
 payments.
 (B) Capitated payments permitted.--Nothing in 
 subparagraph (A) shall be construed to prohibit 
 providers furnishing items and services under the 
 system from receiving payments on a capitated, at-risk 
 basis based on prospectively determined rates.
 (5) Provision of comprehensive benefit package.--
 (A) In general.--The system shall provide for 
 coverage of the comprehensive benefit package, 
 including the cost sharing provided under the package 
 (subject to subparagraph (B)), to all individuals 
 enrolled in the system.
 (B) Imposition of reduced cost sharing.--The system 
 may decrease the cost sharing otherwise provided in the 
 comprehensive benefit package with respect to any 
 individuals enrolled in the system or any class of 
 services included in the package, so long as the system 
 does not increase the cost sharing otherwise imposed 
 with respect to any other individuals or services.
 (6) Cost containment.--The system shall provide for 
 mechanisms to ensure, in a manner satisfactory to the Board, 
 that--
 (A) the rate of growth in health care spending will 
 not be higher than the target established under this 
 Act;
 (B) the expenditures described in subparagraph (A) 
 are computed and effectively monitored;
 (C) automatic, mandatory, nondiscretionary 
 reductions in payments to health care providers will be 
 imposed to the extent required to assure that such per 
 capita expenditures do not exceed the applicable target 
 referred to in subparagraph (A); and
 (D) Federal payments to a single payer State or 
 health care coverage area shall be limited to the 
 payments that would have been made in the absence of 
 the implementation of the single payer system.
 (7) Requirements generally applicable to health plans.--The 
 system shall meet the requirements applicable to a health plan 
 under section 1502(1), except that--
 (A) the system does not have the authority provided 
 to health plans under section 1516(d) (relating to 
 permissible limitations on the enrollment of eligible 
 individuals on the basis of limits on the plan's 
 capacity);
 (B) the system is not required to meet the 
 requirements of section 1515 (relating to restrictions 
 on the marketing of plan materials); and
 (C) the system is not required to meet the 
 requirements of section 1512(a) (relating to plan 
 solvency).

SEC. 1223. SPECIAL RULES FOR STATES OPERATING STATEWIDE SINGLE-PAYER 
 SYSTEM.

 (a) In General.--In the case of a State operating a Statewide 
single-payer system--
 (1) the State shall operate the system throughout the 
 State;
 (2) except as provided in subsection (b), the State shall 
 meet the requirements for participating States under part 1; 
 and
 (3) the State shall assume the functions described in 
 subsection (c) that are otherwise required to be performed by 
 health care coverage areas in participating States that do not 
 operate a Statewide single-payer system.
 (b) Exceptions to Certain Requirements for Participating States.--
In the case of a State operating a Statewide single-payer system, the 
State is not required to meet the following requirements otherwise 
applicable to participating States under part 1:
 (1) Establishment of health care coverage areas.--The 
 requirements of section 1202 (relating to the establishment of 
 health care coverage areas).
 (2) Health plans.--The requirements of subtitle F (relating 
 to health plans), other than requirements relating to 
 coordination of workers' compensation services and automobile 
 liability insurance.
 (3) Financial solvency.--Requirements relating to the 
 financial solvency of health plans in the State.
 (4) Other references inapplicable.--All other references in 
 this Act to health plans, or other entities, and the 
 requirements applicable thereto, that would not exist under a 
 State single payer system, shall not be applicable to a single 
 payer system, except as provided in subsection (c).
 (c) Assumption by State of Certain Requirements Applicable to 
Health Care Coverage Areas.--A State operating a Statewide single-payer 
system shall be subject to the following requirements otherwise 
applicable to health care coverage areas in other participating States 
subject to the requirement that all references to health care coverage 
areas shall, with respect to this section, be deemed to refer to the 
single payer State, and references to health plans shall not apply 
under this section or shall be considered as references, where 
appropriate, to health caregivers:
 (1) Enrollment; issuance of health security cards.--The 
 requirements of subsection (a) of section 1211 and section 1406 
 shall apply to the State, eligible individuals residing in the 
 State, and the single-payer system operated by the State in the 
 same manner as such requirements apply to a health care 
 coverage area, health care coverage area eligible individuals, 
 and health care coverage area health plans.
 (2) Reductions in cost sharing for low-income 
 individuals.--The requirement of section 1281 shall apply to 
 the State in the same manner as such requirement applies to a 
 health care coverage area.
 (3) Data collection; quality.--The data collection and 
 quality requirements of this Act shall apply to the State and 
 the single-payer system operated by the State in the same 
 manner as such requirement applies to a health care coverage 
 area and health plans offered in a health care coverage area.
 (4) Anti-discrimination.--In carrying out such activities 
 as it may have in common with entities in other States as 
 required under part 2 of subtitle D, a State may not 
 discriminate against health caregivers on the basis of mix of 
 health professionals, or location of the headquarters of the 
 plan, except as the State may specifically provide otherwise to 
 assure an equitable distribution of services or organizational 
 arrangement.
 (5) Coordination of enrollment activities.--A State shall 
 coordinate its activities, including enrollment and 
 disenrollment activities--
 (A) in a manner specified by the Board; and
 (B) in a manner that ensures continuous, 
 nonduplicative coverage of eligible individuals and 
 that minimizes administrative procedures and paperwork.
 (d) Financing.--
 (1) In general.--A State operating a Statewide single-payer 
 system shall provide for the financing of the system using, at 
 least in part, a payroll-based financing system that requires 
 employers to pay at least the amount that the employers would 
 be required to pay if the employers were subject to the 
 requirements of subtitle B of title VI defined as the 
 applicable percentage of the per capita cost of health care.
 (2) Use of financing methods.--Such a State may use, 
 consistent with paragraph (1), any other method of financing.
 (e) Single-Payer State Defined.--In this Act, the term ``single-
payer State'' means a State with a Statewide single-payer system in 
effect that has been approved by the Board in accordance with this 
part.

SEC. 1224. SPECIAL RULES FOR HEALTH CARE COVERAGE AREA-SPECIFIC SINGLE-
 PAYER SYSTEMS.

 (a) In General.--In the case of a State operating a health care 
coverage area specific single-payer system--
 (1) the State shall meet the requirements for participating 
 States under part 1; and
 (2) the health care coverage area in which the system is 
 operated shall meet the requirements of subsection (b).
 (b) Requirements for health care coverage area in Which System 
Operates.--A health care coverage area in which an area-specific single 
payer system is operated shall meet the requirements applicable to 
health care coverage areas under subtitle C, except that the health 
care coverage area is not required to meet the following requirements 
of such subtitle:
 (1) Contracts with health plans.--The requirements of 
 section 1302 (relating to contracts with health plans).
 (2) Choice of health plans offered.--The requirements of 
 section 1211 (relating to offering a choice of health plans to 
 eligible enrollees).
 (3) Addressing needs of areas with inadequate health 
 services.--The health care coverage area does not have any of 
 the authorities described in section 1203 (relating to 
 adjusting payments to plans and encouraging the establishment 
 of new plans).

 PART 3--REDUCTIONS IN COST SHARING AND PREMIUMS

SEC. 1281. REDUCTION IN COST SHARING FOR LOW-INCOME FAMILIES.

 (a) Reduction.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to subsection (b), in the case of 
 a family that is enrolled in a community-rated health plan and 
 that is either (A) an AFDC or SSI family or (B) is determined 
 under this subpart to have family adjusted income below 200 
 percent of the applicable poverty level, the family is entitled 
 to a reduction in cost sharing in accordance with this section.
 (2) Timing of reduction.--The reduction in cost sharing 
 shall only apply to items and services furnished after the date 
 the application for such reduction is approved under section 
 1282(c) and before the date of termination of the reduction 
 under this subpart, or, in the case of an AFDC or SSI family, 
 during the period in which the family is such a family.
 (3) Information to providers and plans.--Each State shall 
 provide, through electronic means and otherwise, health care 
 providers and community-rated health plans with access to such 
 information as may be necessary in order to provide for the 
 cost sharing reductions under this section.
 (b) Limitation.--No reduction in cost sharing under subsection 
(c)(1) shall be available for--
 (1) families residing in a health care coverage area if the 
 cooperative for the area determines that there are sufficient 
 low-cost plans (as defined in section 6104(b)(3)) that are 
 lower or combination cost sharing plans available in the area 
 to enroll AFDC and SSI families and families with family 
 adjusted income below 150 percent of the applicable poverty 
 level; or
 (2) for families with family adjusted income between 150 
 and 200 percent of the applicable poverty level.
 (c) Amount of Cost Sharing Reduction.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the reduction in 
 cost sharing under this section shall be such reduction as will 
 reduce cost sharing to the level of a lower or combination cost 
 sharing plan.
 (2) Special treatment of certain families.--
 (A) AFDC, ssi and families below poverty.--In the 
 case of a family that--
 (i) is enrolled in a community-rated health 
 plan;
 (ii) is an AFDC, SSI family or a family 
 that is determined under this subpart to have a 
 family adjusted income below 100 percent of the 
 applicable poverty level; and
 (iii) is enrolled in a lower or combination 
 cost sharing plan or receiving a reduction in 
 cost sharing under paragraph (1);
 the amount of cost sharing applied with respect to an 
 item or service (other than with respect to hospital 
 emergency room services for which there is no emergency 
 medical condition, as defined in section 1867(e)(1) of 
 the Social Security Act) shall be an amount equal to 20 
 percent of the cost sharing amount otherwise applicable 
 under subtitle B, rounded to the nearest dollar.
 (B) Families with incomes between 100 and 150 
 percent of poverty.--In the case of a family that--
 (i) is enrolled in a community-rated health 
 plan;
 (ii) is determined under this subpart to 
 have family adjusted income between 100 and 150 
 percent of the applicable poverty level;
 (iii) is not an AFDC or SSI family; and
 (iv) is enrolled in a lower or combination 
 cost sharing plan or receiving a reduction in 
 cost sharing under paragraph (1);
 the amount of cost sharing applied with respect to an 
 item or service (other than with respect to hospital 
 emergency room services for which there is no emergency 
 medical condition, as defined in section 1867(e)(1) of 
 the Social Security Act) shall be an amount equal to 40 
 percent of the cost sharing amount otherwise applicable 
 under subtitle B, rounded to the nearest dollar.
 (C) Families with incomes between 150 and 200 
 percent of poverty.--In the case of a family that--
 (i) is enrolled in a community-rated health 
 plan;
 (ii) is determined under this subpart to 
 have family adjusted income between 150 and 200 
 percent of the applicable poverty level; and
 (iii) is not an AFDC or SSI family;
 the amount of cost sharing applied with respect to an 
 item or service (other than with respect to hospital 
 emergency room services for which there is no emergency 
 medical condition, as defined in section 1867(e)(1) of 
 the Social Security Act) shall be an amount equal to 40 
 percent of the cost sharing amount otherwise applicable 
 under subtitle B, rounded to the nearest dollar.
 (d) Administration.--
 (1) In general.--In the case of an approved family (as 
 defined in section 1282(b)(2)) enrolled in a community-rated 
 health plan, the State shall pay the plan for cost sharing 
 reductions (other than cost sharing reductions under subsection 
 (c)(2)(A), (B) and (C)) provided under this section out of 
 Federal subsidy payments provided in section 9100(b)(2)(A). 
 Payments made by health plans to providers shall include 
 appropriate payments for cost sharing reductions.
 (2) Estimated payments, subject to reconciliation.--Such 
 payment shall be made initially on the basis of reasonable 
 estimates of cost sharing reductions incurred by such a plan 
 with respect to approved families and shall be reconciled not 
 less often than quarterly based on actual claims for items and 
 services provided.
 (e) No Cost Sharing for American Indians and Certain Veterans and 
Military Personnel.--The provisions of section 6104(a)(3) shall apply 
to cost sharing reductions under this section in the same manner as 
such provisions apply to premium discounts under section 6104.

SEC. 1282. APPLICATION PROCESS FOR COST-SHARING REDUCTIONS AND PREMIUM 
 DISCOUNTS.

 (a) In General.--A community-rated family may apply for a 
determination of the family adjusted income or wage adjusted income of 
the family, for the purpose of establishing eligibility for cost 
sharing reductions under section 1281, and for premium discounts and 
reductions in liability under sections 6104 and 6112.
 (b) Action on Application.--
 (1) In general.--States shall act on such applications and 
 ensure due process in a timely manner prescribed by the Board.
 (2) Approved family defined.--As used in this part, the 
 term ``approved family'' means a family for which an 
 application under this section has been approved and not yet 
 terminated.
 (c) Help in Completing Applications.--Each State shall ensure 
adequate distribution and assist individuals in the filing of 
applications and income reconciliation statements under this subpart.
 (d) Family Adjusted Income.--
 (1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided, in this Act 
 the term ``family adjusted income'' means, with respect to a 
 family, the sum of the adjusted incomes (as defined in 
 paragraph (2)) for all members of the family (determined 
 without regard to section 1012).
 (2) Adjusted income.--In paragraph (1), the term ``adjusted 
 income'' means, with respect to an individual, adjusted gross 
 income (as defined in section 62(a) of the Internal Revenue 
 Code of 1986)--
 (A) determined without regard to sections 135, 
 162(l), 911, 931, and 933 of such Code, and
 (B) increased by the amount of interest received or 
 accrued by the individual which is exempt from tax.
 (3) Presence of additional dependents.--At the option of an 
 individual, a family may include (and not be required to 
 separate out) the income of other individuals who are claimed 
 as dependents of the family for income tax purposes, but such 
 individuals shall not be counted as part of the family for 
 purposes of determining the size of the family.
 (e) Requirement for Periodic Confirmation and Verification and 
Notices.--
 (1) Confirmation and verification requirement.--The 
 continued eligibility of a family for cost sharing reductions, 
 premium discounts and reductions in liability under this 
 section shall be conditioned upon the family's eligibility 
 being--
 (A) confirmed periodically by the State; and
 (B) verified (through the filing of a new 
 application under this section) by the State at the 
 time income reconciliation statements are required to 
 be filed under section 1283.
 (2) Notices of changes in income and employment status.--
 Each approved family shall promptly notify the State of any 
 material increase (as defined by the Secretary) in the family 
 adjusted income or wage adjusted income of the family.
 (f) Penalties for Inaccurate Information.--
 (1) Interest for understatements.--Each individual who 
 knowingly understates income reported in an application to a 
 State under this subpart or otherwise makes a material 
 misrepresentation of information in such an application shall 
 be liable to the State for excess payments made based on such 
 understatement or misrepresentation, and for interest on such 
 excess payments at a rate specified by the Secretary.
 (2) Penalties for misrepresentation.--In addition to the 
 liability established under paragraph (1), each individual who 
 knowingly misrepresents material information in an application 
 under this subpart to a State shall be liable to the State for 
 $2,000 or, if greater, three times the excess payments made 
 based on such misrepresentation.
 (g) Termination of Cost Sharing Reduction and Premium Discounts.--
The State shall, after notice to the family, terminate the reduction of 
cost sharing, premium discounts or reduction in liability for an 
approved family if the family fails to provide for confirmation or 
verification on a timely basis or the State otherwise determines that 
the family is no longer eligible for such reduction.
 (h) Treatment of AFDC and SSI Recipients.--
 (1) No application required.--AFDC and SSI families may not 
 be required to submit an application under this section.
 (2) Notice requirement for ssi recipients.--The Secretary 
 shall notify each State, in a manner specified by the Secretary 
 of the identity (and period of eligibility under the SSI 
 program) of each SSI recipient, unless such a recipient elects 
 (in a manner specified by the Secretary) not to accept the 
 reduction in cost sharing or premium discounts under this part.
 (i) Rules.--The Secretary shall issue rules related to the 
application procedure, confirmation and verification of eligibility, 
ensuring due process in enforcement of penalties for inaccurate 
information, and other issues related to the implmentation of cost 
sharing reductions, premium discounts and reductions in liability under 
this subpart.

SEC. 1283. END-OF-YEAR RECONCILIATION.

 (a) In General.--In the case of a family whose application for a 
premium discount or reduction of liability for a year has been approved 
before the end of the year under this subpart, the family shall, 
subject to subsection (c), file with the State an income reconciliation 
statement to verify the family's adjusted income or wage-adjusted 
income, as appropriate, for the previous year. Such a statement shall 
contain such information as the Secretary shall require. Each State 
shall coordinate the submission of such statements with the notice and 
payment of family payments due under section 1237.
 (b) Reconciliation of Premium Discount and Liability Assistance 
Based on Actual Income.--Based on and using the income reported in the 
reconciliation statement filed under subsection (a) with respect to a 
family, the State shall compute the amount of premium discount or 
reduction in liability that should have been provided under section 
6104 or section 6113 with respect for the family for the year involved. 
If the amount of such discount or liability reduction computed is--
 (1) greater than the amount that has been provided, the 
 family is liable to pay (directly or through an increase in 
 future family share of premiums or other payments) a total 
 amount equal to the amount of the excess payment, or
 (2) less than the amount that has been provided, the State 
 shall pay to the family (directly or through a reduction in 
 future family share of premiums or other payments) a total 
 amount equal to the amount of the deficit.
 (c) No Reconciliation for AFDC and SSI Families; No Reconciliation 
for Cost Sharing Reductions.--No reconciliation statement is required 
under this section--
 (1) with respect to cost sharing reductions provided under 
 section 1281, or
 (2) for a family that only claims a premium discount or 
 liability reduction under this subpart on the basis of being an 
 AFDC or SSI family.
 (d) Disqualification for Failure To File.--In the case of any 
family that is required to file a statement under this section in a 
year and that fails to file such a statement by the deadline specified, 
members of the family shall not be eligible for premium reductions 
under section 6104 or reductions in liability under section 6113 until 
such statement is filed. A State, using rules established by the 
Secretary, shall waive the application of this subsection if the family 
establishes, to the satisfaction of the State under such rules, good 
cause for the failure to file the statement on a timely basis.
 (e) Penalties for False Information.--Any individual that provides 
false information in a statement under subsection (a) is subject to the 
same liabilities as are provided under section 1282 for a 
misrepresentation of material fact described in such section.
 (f) Notice of Requirement.--Each State shall provide for written 
notice, at the end of each year, of the requirement of this section to 
each family which had received premium discount or reduction in 
liability under this subpart in any month during the preceding year and 
to which such requirement applies.
 (g) Transmittal of Information; Verification.--
 (1) In general.--Each participating State shall transmit 
 annually to the Secretary such information relating to the 
 income of families for the previous year as the Secretary may 
 require to verify such income under this subpart.
 (2) Verification.--Each participating State may use such 
 information as it has available to it, including information 
 made available to the State under section 6103(l)(7)(D)(x) of 
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, in verifying income of 
 families with applications filed under this subpart. The 
 Secretary of the Treasury may, consistent with section 6103 of 
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, permit return information to 
 be disclosed and used by a participating State in verifying 
 such income but only in accordance with such section.
 (h) Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed as 
authorizing reconciliation of any cost sharing reduction provided under 
this subpart.

SEC. 1284. ELIGIBILITY ERROR RATES.

 Each State shall make eligibility determinations for premium 
discounts, liability reductions, and cost sharing reductions under 
sections 6104 and 6123, section 6113, and section 1281, respectively, 
in a manner that maintains the error rates below an applicable maximum 
permissible error rate specified by the Secretary (or the Secretary of 
Labor with respect to section 6123). In specifying such a rate, the 
Secretary shall take into account maximum permissible error rates 
recognized by the Federal Government under comparable State-
administered programs.

 Subtitle D--Consumer Purchasing Cooperatives

 PART 1--GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

SEC. 1301. DESIGNATION AND ORGANIZATION OF COOPERATIVES.

 (a) Designation of Cooperatives.--A State shall certify consumer 
purchasing cooperatives (in this Act referred to as ``cooperatives'') 
in accordance with this part. Each cooperative shall be chartered under 
State law and operated as a not-for-profit corporation.
 (b) Board of Directors.--Each cooperative shall be governed by a 
Board of Directors to be composed in equal numbers of representatives 
of community-rated employers, eligible employees, and eligible 
individuals.
 (c) Membership.--A cooperative shall accept all eligible employers 
and eligible individuals residing within the area served by the 
cooperative as members if such employers, employees or individuals 
request such membership. Members of a cooperative shall have voting 
rights to select Board members consistent with rules established by the 
State.
 (d) Duties of Cooperatives.--Each cooperative shall--
 (1) enter into agreements with health plans under section 
 1302;
 (2) enter into agreements with community-rated employers;
 (3) enroll eligible individuals in health plans;
 (4) make payments to health plans on behalf of community-
 rated employers and eligible individuals;
 (5) provide for coordination with other cooperatives;
 (6) provide information on health plans, in accordance with 
 section 1205; and
 (7) carry out other functions provided for under this 
 title.
 (e) Limitation on Activities.--A cooperative shall not--
 (1) perform any activity (including review, approval, or 
 enforcement) relating to payment rates for providers;
 (2) perform any activity (including certification or 
 enforcement) relating to compliance of health plans with the 
 requirements of this Act;
 (3) assume insurance risk; or
 (4) perform other activities identified by the State as 
 being inconsistent with the performance of its duties under 
 this Act.
 (f) Rules of Construction.--
 (1) Single organization serving multiple health care 
 coverage area.--Nothing in this section shall be construed as 
 preventing a single not-for-profit corporation from being the 
 cooperative for more than one health care coverage area.
 (2) Multiple cooperatives.--Noting in this section shall be 
 construed to prevent a State from designating or establishing 
 more than one cooperative in a health care coverage area.
 (3) Voluntary participation.--Nothing in this section shall 
 be construed as requiring any individual or community-rated 
 employer to purchase a health plan exclusively through a 
 cooperative.

SEC. 1302. AGREEMENTS WITH HEALTH PLANS.

 (a) Agreements.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2)(A) of 
 subsection (c)--
 (A) each cooperative for a health care coverage 
 area shall enter into an agreement under this section 
 with each certified community-rated health plan and 
 each health plan of the Department of Veterans Affairs 
 and Uniformed Health Services Plan that serves 
 residents of the health care coverage area; and
 (B) a cooperative may not refuse to enter into such 
 an agreement with a health plan which is certified by a 
 State as offering coverage in the health care coverage 
 area, nor may a community-rated health plan refuse to 
 enter into an agreement with a cooperative in 
 accordance with section 1522.
 (2) Community-rated premium.--Except as provided in 
 paragraph (2)(B) of subsection (c), a cooperative shall offer 
 plans at the community-rate (as defined in section 6000(a)(3)) 
 filed by the plan.
 (3) Termination of agreement.--The State shall establish a 
 process for the termination of agreements entered into under 
 this section and a process for appealing such termination under 
 this paragraph. In accordance with rules established by the 
 State--
 (A) a cooperative may terminate an agreement with a 
 health plan if the health plan's certification for the 
 health care coverage area involved is terminated or if 
 the health plan fails to fulfill the requirements of 
 the agreement; and
 (B) a health plan may appeal the termination of an 
 agreement with a cooperative under this paragraph to 
 the State in accordance with rules and procedures 
 established by the State.
 (b) Receipt of Gross Premiums.--
 (1) In general.--Under an agreement between a cooperative 
 and a health plan, payment of premiums shall be made directly 
 to the cooperative in accordance with rules promulgated by the 
 Board.
 (2) Forwarding of premiums.--Under an agreement between a 
 health plan and a cooperative, the cooperative shall forward to 
 each health plan in which an eligible individual has been 
 enrolled the amounts collected on the behalf of enrollees in 
 such plans.
 (c) Negotiating Cooperatives.--
 (1) In general.--A State may designate a cooperative as a 
 ``negotiating cooperative'' if such cooperative is the sole 
 State-certified cooperative in a health care coverage area.
 (2) Authorities and responsibilities of negotiating 
 cooperatives.--
 (A) In general.--Negotiating cooperatives may 
 exclude plans from the plans offered to cooperative 
 members if such cooperatives offer at least three 
 plans, including at least one fee-for-service plan.
 (B) Premiums.--A health plan may, through 
 negotiations with a negotiating cooperative, offer to 
 individuals enrolled through such cooperative a premium 
 that is less than the community-rated premium, but in 
 no case shall a plan bid a premium to a negotiating 
 cooperative that is higher than the filed per-capita 
 community-rated bid (described in section 6000(a)(1)).

SEC. 1303. AGREEMENTS WITH COMMUNITY-RATED EMPLOYERS.

 (a) In General.--Cooperatives for each health care coverage area 
shall offer to enter into an agreement under this section with each 
community-rated employer that employs individuals in the area and that 
desires to join the cooperative. Each arrangement between a community-
rated employer and a cooperative shall include provisions consistent 
with the requirements of this subtitle.
 (b) Election of Enrollment.--Qualified employees of a community-
rated employer may elect to enroll in a plan offered through the 
cooperative with which the employer has entered into an agreement, 
through a cooperative sponsored by the FEHBP or directly with a health 
plan selected by the employer (if such plan is not offered by the 
cooperative selected by the employer). Qualified employees not residing 
in the health care coverage area served by the cooperative selected by 
the employer shall enroll in a health plan consistent with rules 
promulgated by the Board. The cooperative selected by the employer 
shall be responsible for forwarding premium payments to the appropriate 
plan or cooperative for each qualified employee.
 (c) Forwarding Information on Eligible Employees.--Under an 
agreement between an employer and a cooperative, the employer must 
forward to the appropriate cooperative such information as may be 
required by the Secretary or the Board.

SEC. 1304. ENROLLING INDIVIDUALS IN HEALTH PLANS THROUGH A COOPERATIVE.

 (a) In General.--Each cooperative shall offer community-rate 
eligible individuals the opportunity to enroll in any health plan which 
has an agreement with the cooperative for the health care coverage area 
in which the individual resides.
 (b) Enrollment Process.--Each cooperative shall establish an 
enrollment process in accordance with rules established by the Board, 
including a process for enrolling those qualified employees of a 
community-rated employer who elect not to participate in the 
cooperative with which the employer has entered into an agreement.
 (c) Enrollment Fees.--The Board shall promulgate rules regarding 
payment of cooperative fees by employees exercising an election under 
section 1303(b).

SEC. 1305. COOPERATIVE FEE.

 (a) In General.--Each cooperative shall charge members a uniform 
membership fee to cover the cost of activities undertaken by the 
cooperative (including all administrative costs incurred by the 
cooperative).
 (b) Disclosure.--Each cooperative shall, prior to the time of 
enrollment, publish the membership fee of such cooperative. Such fees 
shall be calculated and identified as a separate charge from the 
premium charged by the health plans offered by the cooperative. A 
comparison of fees charged by each cooperative in a health care 
coverage area shall be incorporated into the plan brochure described in 
section 1205.
 (c) Multiple Cooperatives.--In health care coverage areas in which 
States have certified multiple cooperatives, such cooperatives may 
compete for members on the basis of the fees described in this section.

SEC. 1306. COORDINATION AMONG COOPERATIVES.

 The State shall establish rules consistent with this section for 
coordination among cooperatives with respect to enrollment, payment of 
premiums, and provision of out-of-area benefits and services.

SEC. 1307. THIRD-PARTY CONTRACTING TO PERFORM DUTIES.

 (a) In General.--Each cooperative may contract with qualified, 
independent third parties for any service necessary to carry out the 
powers and duties of the cooperative pursuant to the requirements 
established under this section.
 (b) Restriction on Persons Eligible for Third-Party Contract.--No 
person may act, directly or through an affiliated company, both as a 
health plan serving the cooperative and as an independent third party 
contractor as described in subsection (a) within a given health care 
coverage area.

 PART 2--ACCESS TO HEALTH PLANS SPONSORED BY FEHBP

SEC. 1321. DESIGNATION OF FEHBP AS A CONSUMER PURCHASING COOPERATIVE.

 (a) In General.--The Federal Employees Health Benefits Program 
(FEHBP) shall serve as a consumer purchasing cooperative in each health 
care coverage area designated by each State. The responsibilities and 
authorities provided to the FEHBP under this part shall be carried out 
by the Federal Office of Personnel Management.
 (b) Responsibilities and Authorities of FEHBP-Sponsored 
Cooperatives.--
 (1) Exemption from cooperative organizational 
 requirements.--The organizational requirements specified in 
 part 1 with respect to State certification (under section 
 1301(a)), governance (under section 1301(b)), and restrictions 
 on the authority of cooperatives to negotiate with health plans 
 (under section 1302(a)), shall not apply to a cooperative 
 sponsored by the FEHBP.
 (2) General responsibilities and authorities.--A 
 cooperative sponsored by the FEHBP shall undertake all the 
 duties and retain all the privileges specified in part 1, 
 including section 1302 (regarding requirements of plans to 
 contract with, and not undersell, cooperatives).
 (c) Satisfaction of State Requirement To Certify A Cooperative.--
Compliance with the requirements of this part with respect to the 
establishment of a cooperative sponsored by the FEHBP shall satisfy a 
State's requirement to certify at least one consumer purchasing 
cooperative under section 1201(6).
 (d) Requirement of OPM.--The Federal Office of Personnel Management 
is hereby authorized to take such actions as are appropriate to fulfill 
its responsibilities under this part.

SEC. 1322. SPECIAL RULES FOR FEHBP SUPPLEMENTAL PLANS.

 (a) FEHBP Supplemental Plans.--
 (1) Development.--The Office of Personnel Management shall 
 develop FEHBP supplemental health benefit policies. The Office 
 of Personnel Management shall meet and confer with 
 representatives of Federal employees regarding the supplemental 
 health benefit policies and the cost sharing policies to be 
 offered (including premium contributions, if any, to be made by 
 the Federal Government with respect to such policies for 
 Federal employees and annuitants) through a process to be 
 established by the National Partnership Council.
 (2) Offering.--The Federal Government shall offer FEHBP 
 supplemental health benefit policies developed in accordance 
 with paragraph (1) and cost sharing policies as provided in 
 section 1523 to Federal employees, annuitants, and any other 
 community rate eligible individual (as defined in section 
 1902(9)).
 (b) Definitions.--For purposes of this section:
 (1) Annuitant.--The term ``annuitant'' means an 
 ``annuitant'' as defined by section 8901 of title 5, United 
 States Code.
 (2) FEHBP.--The term ``FEHBP'' means the health insurance 
 program under chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code.
 (3) Federal employee.--The term ``Federal employee'' means 
 an ``employee'' as defined by section 8901 of title 5, United 
 States Code.

 Subtitle E--Employer Purchasers

 PART 1--DEFINITIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF EMPLOYER PURCHASERS

SEC. 1401. DEFINITIONS.

 (a) Large Group Purchaser Defined.--In this Act, the term ``large 
group purchaser'' means--
 (1) an employer that--
 (A) is a current large employer (as defined in 
 subsection (e)(2)),
 (B) is a dual choice employer (as defined in 
 subsection (e)(4)) that has elected to become a large 
 employer, and
 (C) is not an excluded employer described in 
 subsection (b)(2); or
 (2) an eligible purchaser (described in subsection (b) if--
 (A) the sponsor elects, in a form and manner 
 specified by the Secretary of Labor consistent with 
 this subpart, to be treated as a large group purchaser 
 under this title and such election has not been 
 terminated under section 1403; and
 (B) the purchaser has filed with the Secretary of 
 Labor a document describing how the sponsor shall carry 
 out activities as such a large group purchaser 
 consistent with part 2.
 (b) Eligible Large Group Purchaser.--
 (1) In general.--In this subpart, each of the following is 
 an eligible large group purchaser:
 (A) New large employer.--An employer that--
 (i) is a new large employer (as defined in 
 subsection (e)(2)) as of the date of an 
 election under subsection (a)(1), and
 (ii) is not an excluded employer described 
 in paragraph (2).
 (B) Plan sponsor of a multiemployer plan.--A plan 
 sponsor described in section 3(16)(B)(iii) of Employee 
 Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, but only with 
 respect to a group health plan that is a multiemployer 
 plan (as defined in subsection (e)(3)) maintained by 
 the sponsor and only if--
 (i) such plan offered health benefits as of 
 September 1, 1993, and
 (ii) as of both September 1, 1993, and 
 January 1, 1996, such plan covers more than 
 1,000 full-time employees in the United States, 
 or the plan is maintained by one or more 
 affiliates of the same labor organization, or 
 one or more affiliates of labor organizations 
 representing employees in the same industry, 
 covering more than 1,000 employees.
 (2) Excluded employers.--For purposes of this section, any 
 of the following are excluded employers described in this 
 paragraph:
 (A) An employer whose primary business is employee 
 leasing.
 (B) The Federal government (other than the United 
 States Postal Service).
 (c) Individuals Eligible To Enroll in Experience-Rated Plans.--For 
purposes of part 1 of subtitle A, subject to subsection (d)--
 (1) Full-time employees of large employers.--Each eligible 
 individual who is a full-time employee (as defined in section 
 1901(b)(2)(C)) of--
 (A) a current large employer, or
 (B) a new large employer that has an election in 
 effect as a large group purchaser,
 is eligible to enroll in an experience-rated plan offered by 
 such purchaser.
 (2) Multiemployer purchasers.--
 (A) Participants.--Each participant and beneficiary 
 (as defined in subparagraph (B)) under a multiemployer 
 plan, with respect to which an eligible purchaser of 
 the plan described in subsection (b)(1)(B) has an 
 election in effect as a large group purchaser, is 
 eligible to enroll in an experience-rated plan offered 
 by such purchaser.
 (B) Participant and beneficiary defined.--In 
 subparagraph (A), the terms ``participant'' and 
 ``beneficiary'' have the meaning given such terms in 
 section 3 of the Employee Retirement Income Security 
 Act of 1974.
 (3) Ineligible to enroll in community-rated plan.--Except 
 as provided in section 1013, an experience-rated individual is 
 not eligible to enroll under a community-rated plan.
 (d) Exclusion of Certain Individuals.--In accordance with rules of 
the Board, the following individuals shall not be treated as 
experience-rated individuals:
 (1) AFDC recipients.
 (2) SSI recipients.
 (3) Individuals who are described in section 1004(b) 
 (relating to veterans, military personnel, and Indians) and who 
 elect an applicable health plan described in such section.
 (4) Employees who are part-time, seasonal or temporary 
 workers (as defined by the Board), other than such workers who 
 are treated as experience-rated individuals pursuant to a 
 collective bargaining agreement (as defined by the Secretary of 
 Labor).
 (5) Electing migrant and seasonal agricultural workers 
 (described in section 1005(b)(4)).
 (e) Additional Definitions.--As used in this subtitle:
 (1) Group health plan.--The term ``group health plan'' 
 means an employee welfare benefit plan (as defined in section 
 3(1) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974) 
 providing medical care (as defined in section 213(d) of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986) to participants or beneficiaries 
 (as defined in section 3 of the Employee Retirement Income 
 Security Act of 1974) directly or through insurance, 
 reimbursement, or otherwise.
 (2) Large employer.--The term ``large employer'' means an 
 employer with more than 1000 full-time employees in the United 
 States. Such term includes the United States Postal Service. A 
 large group purchaser shall offer a choice of health plans to 
 qualified employees in accordance with section 1403 and meet 
 the enrollment requirements described in such section.
 (3) Small employer.--The term ``small employer'' means an 
 employer with 500 or less full-time employees. A small employer 
 shall offer a choice of health plan to qualified employees in 
 accordance with section 1403 and meet the enrollment 
 requirements described in such section. A small employer under 
 this subtitle is a community-rated employer described in title 
 I and title VI of this Act.
 (4) Dual choice employer.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``dual choice employer'' 
 means an employer with more than 500 but less than 1000 
 full-time employees.
 (B) Election.--A dual choice employer may elect to 
 be considered as either a small employer or a large 
 employer for purposes of this Act. The status of the 
 employer as a small employer or a large employer after 
 such an election shall remain in effect for a period of 
 not less than 3 years. A dual choice employer electing 
 to be a large employer shall not be eligible for 
 discounts under title VI.
 (5) Employer sponsored health plan.--The term ``employer 
 sponsored health plan'' means a group health plan with an 
 enrollment of at least 500 individuals that is established and 
 maintained by a large employer. The health plan may be operated 
 as a fee-for-service plan (as described in section 
 1211(b)(2)(A)) or as a network plan (as described in section 
 1514(c)(4)). The employer shall retain the insurance risk and 
 meet requirements specified by the Secretary of Labor for such 
 plans in accordance with section 1406. The Secretary shall 
 ensure that employer sponsored health plans meet the 
 requirements of this paragraph.
 (6) Multiemployer plan.--The term ``multiemployer plan'' 
 has the meaning given such term in section 3(37) of the 
 Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, and includes 
 any plan that is treated as such a plan under title I of such 
 Act.

SEC. 1402. ELECTION OF LARGE GROUP PURCHASERS.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 6 months after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Labor shall promulgate 
regulations for the election of new large employers and multiemployer 
plans as large group purchasers and for the termination of such 
elections of multiemployer plans.
 (b) Dual Choice Employers.--If the number of full-time employees of 
a dual choice employer changes during the coverage year such that the 
employer has fewer than 500 or more than 1000 employees, the status of 
such employer shall be retained only throughout that year. The employer 
shall notify the Secretary of Labor of change in employer status in 
such a manner as the Secretary shall prescribe.

SEC. 1403. EMPLOYEE ENROLLMENT REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) Establishment of Employer Enrollment Function.--
 (1) In general.--Each employer shall make available 
 enrollment in at least three health plans, one of which shall 
 be a fee-for-service plan, to each eligible employee of such 
 employer.
 (2) Assurance of enrollment.--Each employer shall ensure 
 that each eligible individual is enrolled in a health plan and 
 receives continuous coverage pursuant to regulations 
 promulgated by the Secretary of Labor and consistent with the 
 appropriate provisions of subtitle F. The methods and 
 procedures prescribed in such regulations shall ensure the 
 enrollment of such individuals at the time such individuals 
 first become eligible individuals with respect to the employer.
 (3) Information.--The Secretary shall promulgate 
 regulations regarding the provision of information to employees 
 by employers to effectuate enrollment under this section.
 (4) Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
 construed to prevent an employer from complying with this 
 subsection through the offering of plans provided by a single 
 carrier.
 (5) Small employers.--Each small employer shall offer, at 
 the age-adjusted community rate in the area, at least three 
 State-certified health plans, one of which shall be a fee-for-
 service plan, and shall join a consumer purchasing cooperative. 
 A small employer may satisfy the requirement that it offer at 
 least three health plans by joining a consumer purchasing 
 cooperative.
 (b) Forwarding of Enrollment Information.--
 (1) Information regarding plans.--An employer must provide 
 each employee of such employer (including any part-time or 
 seasonal employee) with information regarding all qualified 
 health plans offered in the health care coverage area in which 
 the employer is located and, if the employee resides in another 
 health care coverage area, information regarding how to obtain 
 information on qualified health plans offered to residents of 
 such other health care coverage area.
 (2) Information regarding employees.--An employer must 
 forward the name and address (and any other necessary 
 identifying information specified by the Secretary) of each 
 eligible employee--
 (A) to the qualified health plan in which such 
 employee is enrolled, or
 (B) to the cooperative (if any) through which such 
 enrollment is made.
 (c) Payroll Deduction.--The employer, upon authorization by the 
employee, shall provide for the deduction, from the employee's wages or 
other compensation, of the premium amount due (less any employer 
contribution) to the plan or purchasing cooperative in accordance with 
section 6209. This subsection shall only apply to plans and purchasing 
cooperatives made available by the employer.
 (d) No Requirement To Enroll in Employer-Provided Plan.--An 
eligible employee of a community-rated employer may elect not to enroll 
in a health plan offered by an employer under this section. In addition 
to such plans, such an employee may enroll in a health plan offered 
through a purchasing cooperative of the employers choosing, in an 
association health plan (as described in section 1508) or through a 
plan offered by the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program.

SEC. 1404. RESPONSIBILITIES AND AUTHORITY OF EMPLOYER PURCHASERS.

 (a) Selection of Plans by Majority of Employees.--Each employer 
shall make the selections of health plans under this subsection on an 
annual basis. In making each such selection, a employer shall comply 
with any selection made by at least 50 percent of the eligible 
employees of the employer. The Secretary of Labor shall prescribe rules 
which shall govern the manner in which employees may make such a 
selection.
 (b) Specific Requirements of Larger Group Purchasers.--
 (1) Contracts with plans.--Each large group purchaser may--
 (A) negotiate with a State-certified health plan to 
 enter into a contract with the plan for the enrollment 
 of such individuals under the plan; or
 (B) offer to individuals an appropriate employer 
 sponsored health plan (as defined in section 
 1401(e)(5));
 or offer a combination of the plans described in this 
 paragraph.
 (2) Terms of contracts with state-certified health plans.--
 Contracts under this section between a large group purchaser 
 and a State-certified health plan may contain such provisions 
 (not inconsistent with the requirements of this title) as the 
 large group purchaser and plan may provide, except that in no 
 case does such contract remove the obligation of the large 
 group purchaser to provide for health benefits to large group 
 purchaser eligible individuals consistent with this part.
 (3) Plan and information requirements.--
 (A) In general.--A large group purchaser shall 
 provide a written submission to the Secretary of Labor 
 (in such form as the Secretary may require) detaining 
 how the large group purchaser will carry out its 
 activities under this part.
 (B) Annual information.--An employer group 
 purchaser shall provide to the Secretary of Labor each 
 year, in such form and manner as the Secretary may 
 require, such information as the Secretary may require 
 in order to monitor the compliance of the purchaser 
 with the requirements of this part.
 (4) Management of funds.--
 (A) Management of funds.--The management of funds 
 by an large group purchaser shall be subject to the 
 applicable fiduciary requirements of part 4 of subtitle 
 B of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security 
 Act of 1974, together with the applicable enforcement 
 provisions of part 5 of subtitle B of title I of such 
 Act.
 (B) Management of finances and records; accounting 
 system.--Each large group purchaser shall comply with 
 standards relating to the management of finances and 
 records and accounting systems as the Secretary of 
 Labor shall specify.
 (c) Large Group Purchaser Transition.--Each large group purchaser 
must provide coverage--
 (1) as of the first day of any month in which an individual 
 first becomes a large group sponsor eligible individual, and
 (2) through the end of the month in the case of a large 
 group sponsor eligible individual who loses such eligibility 
 during the month unless covered under paragraph (1).
 (d) Employee Share.--The premiums charged by a large group 
purchaser to an employee for enrollment in a plan offered by such a 
purchaser (not taking into account any employer premium payment under 
section 6131) shall vary only by class of family enrollment (as 
specified under section 6131) and by geographic area. The Secretary of 
Labor shall promulgate regulations regarding the designation of 
geographic area by large group purchasers. Such regulations shall 
provide for such exceptions to the requirements under this section with 
respect to a sponsor described in section 1401(b)(1)(B), as may be 
appropriate.

SEC. 1405. DEVELOPMENT OF LARGE EMPLOYER GROUP PURCHASERS.

 (a) In General.--Nothing in this title shall be construed as 
prohibiting 2 or more large employers from forming a purchasing group 
with respect to the employees of such employer or employers. Such 
entities shall comply with the requirements applicable to health plans 
offered by large group purchasers under this subtitle.
 (b) No Use of Individual and Community-Rated Employer Purchasing 
Cooperatives.--A large employer shall be ineligible to purchase health 
insurance through an individual and community-rated employer purchasing 
cooperative.

SEC. 1406. TIMING AND TERMINATION OF EMPLOYER ELECTIONS.

 (a) Regulations.--Not later than 6 months after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Labor shall promulgate 
regulations for employer elections.
 (b) Elective Termination.--A large group sponsor (other than a 
large employer) may terminate an election under this part by filing 
with the National Health Board and the Secretary of Labor a notice of 
intent to terminate.
 (c) Effective Date of Termination.--In the case of a termination of 
an election under this section, in accordance with rules established by 
the Secretary of Labor--
 (1) subject to section 6022(a)(1), the termination shall 
 take effect as of the effective date of enrollments in 
 experience-rated plans made during the next open enrollment 
 period (as provided in section 1403), and
 (2) the enrollment of eligible individuals in experience-
 rated plans of the sponsor shall be terminated as of such date 
 and such individuals shall be enrolled in other applicable 
 health plans effective on such date.
 (d) Notice to Board.--If an election with respect to a large group 
sponsor is terminated pursuant to subsection (b), the Secretary of 
Labor shall notify the National Health Board of the termination of the 
election.

PART 2--REQUIREMENTS FOR HEALTH PLANS OFFERED BY LARGE GROUP PURCHASERS

SEC. 1411. ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO EMPLOYER SPONSORED 
 PLANS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Labor shall develop and publish 
standards applicable to employer sponsored plans (as defined in section 
1401(e)(5)) offered by large group purchasers relating to the 
requirements described in subsection (b). The Secretary shall develop 
and publish such standards by not later than the date that is 6 months 
after the date of enactment of this Act. Such standards shall be the 
certified health plan standards applicable to employer sponsored plans 
under this part.
 (b) Requirements Specified.--
 (1) In general.--The requirements referred to in subsection 
 (a) are applicable plan requirements specified in subtitle F.
 (2) Other requirements.--The standards referred to in 
 subsection (a) shall include standards--
 (A) relating to financial solvency, reserve and 
 guaranty fund requirements, as the Secretary of Labor 
 shall specify, except that such standards shall be 
 consistent with the applicable rules under part 4 of 
 title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act 
 of 1974;
 (B) relating to the payments of premiums; and
 (C) relating to claims grievance procedures, in 
 accordance with subtitle C of title V.

SEC. 1412. CORRECTIVE ACTIONS FOR HEALTH PLANS OFFERED BY LARGE 
 EMPLOYERS.

 (a) In General.--The plan sponsor of each large employer plan shall 
determine semiannually whether the requirements of this part are met. 
In any case in which the plan sponsor determines that there is reason 
to believe that there is or will be a failure to meet such 
requirements, or the Secretary of Labor makes such a determination and 
so notifies the plan sponsor, the plan sponsor shall, within 90 days 
after making such determination or receiving such notification, notify 
such Secretary (in such form and manner as such Secretary may prescribe 
by regulation) of a description of the corrective actions (if any) that 
the plan sponsor has taken or plans to take in response to such 
recommendations. The plan sponsor shall thereafter report to such 
Secretary, in such form and frequency as such Secretary may specify to 
the plan sponsor, regarding corrective action taken by the plan sponsor 
until such requirements are met. Such Secretary may make a 
determination that a large employer plan has ceased to be a large 
employer plan only if such Secretary is satisfied that the necessary 
corrective action cannot reasonably be expected to occur on a timely 
basis necessary to avoid failure to provide benefits for which the plan 
is obligated.
 (b) Disqualified or Termination of Plan.--
 (1) In general.--In any case in which the plan sponsor of a 
 large employer plan determines that there is reason to believe 
 that the plan will cease to be a large employer sponsored 
 health plan or will terminate, the plan sponsor shall so inform 
 the Secretary of Labor, shall develop a plan for winding up the 
 affairs of the plan in connection with such disqualification or 
 termination in a manner which will result in timely payment of 
 all benefits for which the plan is obligated, and shall submit 
 such plan in writing to such Secretary. Actions required under 
 this subparagraph shall be taken in such form and manner as may 
 be prescribed in regulations jointly prescribed by such 
 Secretary.
 (2) Actions required in connection with disqualification or 
 termination.--
 (A) In general.--In any case in which--
 (i) the Secretary of Labor has been 
 notified under paragraph (1) of a failure of a 
 large employer sponsored health plan to meet 
 the requirements of this part and has not been 
 notified by the plan sponsor that corrective 
 action has restored compliance with such 
 requirements, and
 (ii) such Secretary determines that the 
 continuing failure to meet such requirements 
 can be reasonably expected to result in a 
 continuing failure to pay benefits for which 
 the plan is obligated,
 the plan sponsor and the large employer shall comply 
 with the requirements of subparagraph (B) or (C), as 
 applicable.
 (B) Actions by plan sponsor.--Upon a determination 
 by the Secretary of Labor under subparagraph (A)(ii), 
 the plan sponsor shall, at the direction of such 
 Secretary, terminate the plan and, in the course of the 
 termination, take such actions as such Secretary may 
 require as necessary to ensure that the affairs of the 
 plan will be, to the maximum extent possible, wound up 
 in a manner which will result in timely payment of all 
 benefits for which the plan is obligated.
 (C) Actions by large employer.--Upon a 
 determination by the Secretary of Labor under 
 subparagraph (A)(ii), the large employer shall provide 
 for such contingency coverage for all eligible 
 employees of the employer in accordance with 
 regulations which shall be prescribed by such 
 Secretary. Such regulations may provide for temporary 
 coverage of such employees under a plan provided by a 
 purchasing group in the appropriate area, a plan 
 provided under chapter 89 of title 5, United States 
 Code, or other appropriate means established in such 
 regulations.

SEC. 1413. DISCLOSURE AND RESERVE REQUIREMENTS FOR LARGE EMPLOYER 
 PURCHASER HEALTH PLANS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Labor shall ensure that each 
large group purchaser health plan which is an employer sponsored health 
plan maintains plan assets in trust as provided in section 403 of the 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974--
 (1) without any exemption under section 403(b)(4) of such 
 Act, and
 (2) in amounts which the Secretary determines are 
 sufficient to provide at any time for payment to health care 
 providers of all outstanding balances owed by the plan at such 
 time and consistent with standards for State certified health 
 plans.
The requirements of the preceding sentence may be met through letters 
of credit, bonds, or other appropriate security to the extent provided 
in regulations of the Secretary.
 (b) Disclosure.--Each employer sponsored health plan shall notify 
the Secretary at such time as the financial reserve requirements of 
this section are not being met. The Secretary may assess a civil money 
penalty of not more than $100,000 against any large group purchaser for 
any failure to provide such notification in such form and manner and 
within such time periods as the Secretary may prescribe by regulation.

SEC. 1414. TRUSTEESHIP BY THE SECRETARY OF INSOLVENT LARGE EMPLOYER 
 PURCHASED HEALTH PLANS.

 (a) Appointment of Secretary as Trustee for Insolvent Plans.--
Whenever the Secretary of Labor determines that a large employer 
sponsored health plan will be unable to provide benefits when due or is 
otherwise in a financially hazardous condition as defined in 
regulations of the Secretary, the Secretary shall, upon notice to the 
plan, apply to the appropriate United States district court for 
appointment of the Secretary as trustee to administer the plan for the 
duration of the insolvency. The plan may appear as a party and other 
interested persons may intervene in the proceedings at the discretion 
of the court. The court shall appoint the Secretary trustee if the 
court determines that the trusteeship is necessary to protect the 
interests of the enrolled individuals or health care providers or to 
avoid any unreasonable deterioration of the financial condition of the 
plan or any unreasonable increase in the liability of the large group 
purchaser Health Plan Insolvency Fund. The trusteeship of the Secretary 
shall continue until the conditions described in the first sentence of 
this subsection are remedied or the plan is terminated.
 (b) Powers as Trustee.--The Secretary of Labor, upon appointment as 
trustee under subsection (a), shall have the power--
 (1) to do any act authorized by the plan, this Act, or 
 other applicable provisions of law to be done by the plan 
 administrator or any trustee of the plan,
 (2) to require the transfer of all (or any part) of the 
 assets and records of the plan to the Secretary as trustee,
 (3) to invest any assets of the plan which the Secretary 
 holds in accordance with the provisions of the plan, 
 regulations of the Secretary, and applicable provisions of law,
 (4) to do such other acts as the Secretary determines to be 
 necessary to continue operation of the plan without increasing 
 the potential liability of the large group purchaser Health 
 Plan Insolvency Fund, if such acts may be done under the 
 provisions of the plan,
 (5) to require the large group purchaser, the plan 
 administrator, any contributing employer, and any employee 
 organization representing covered individuals to furnish any 
 information with respect to the plan which the Secretary as 
 trustee may reasonably need in order to administer the plan,
 (6) to collect for the plan any amounts due the plan and to 
 recover reasonable expenses of the trusteeship,
 (7) to commence, prosecute, or defend on behalf of the plan 
 any suit or proceeding involving the plan,
 (8) to issue, publish, or file such notices, statements, 
 and reports as may be required under regulations of the 
 Secretary or by any order of the court,
 (9) to terminate the plan and liquidate the plan assets in 
 accordance with applicable provisions of this Act and other 
 provisions of law, to restore the plan to the responsibility of 
 the large group purchaser, or to continue the trusteeship,
 (10) to provide for the enrollment of individuals covered 
 under the plan in an appropriate health plan, and
 (11) to do such other acts as may be necessary to comply 
 with this Act or any order of the court and to protect the 
 interests of enrolled individuals and health care providers.
 (c) Notice of Appointment.--As soon as practicable after the 
Secretary's appointment as trustee, the Secretary shall give notice of 
such appointment to--
 (1) the plan administrator,
 (2) each enrolled individual,
 (3) each employer who may be liable for contributions to 
 the plan, and
 (4) each employee organization which, for purposes of 
 collective bargaining, represents enrolled individuals.
 (d) Additional Duties.--Except to the extent inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act or part 4 of subtitle B of title I of the 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, or as may be otherwise 
ordered by the court, the Secretary of Labor, upon appointment as 
trustee under this section, shall be subject to the same duties as 
those of a trustee under section 704 of title 11, United States Code, 
and shall have the duties of a fiduciary for purposes of such part 4.
 (e) Other Proceedings.--An application by the Secretary of Labor 
under this subsection may be filed notwithstanding the pendency in the 
same or any other court of any bankruptcy, mortgage foreclosure, or 
equity receivership proceeding, or any proceeding to reorganize, 
conserve, or liquidate such plan or its property, or any proceeding to 
enforce a lien against property of the plan.
 (f) Jurisdiction of Court.--
 (1) In general.--Upon the filing of an application for the 
 appointment as trustee or the issuance of a decree under this 
 subsection, the court to which the application is made shall 
 have exclusive jurisdiction of the plan involved and its 
 property wherever located with the powers, to the extent 
 consistent with the purposes of this subsection, of a court of 
 the United States having jurisdiction over cases under chapter 
 11 of title 11, United States Code. Pending an adjudication 
 under this section such court shall stay, and upon appointment 
 by it of the Secretary of Labor as trustee, such court shall 
 continue the stay of, any pending mortgage foreclosure, equity 
 receivership, or other proceeding to reorganize, conserve, or 
 liquidate the plan, the large group purchaser, or property of 
 such plan or purchaser, and any other suit against any 
 receiver, conservator, or trustee of the plan, the purchaser, 
 or property of the plan or purchaser. Pending such adjudication 
 and upon the appointment by it of the Secretary as trustee, the 
 court may stay any proceeding to enforce a lien against 
 property of the plan or the large group purchaser or any other 
 suit against the plan or the purchaser.
 (2) Venue.--An action under this subsection may be brought 
 in the judicial district where the plan administrator resides 
 or does business or where any asset of the plan is situated. A 
 district court in which such action is brought may issue 
 process with respect to such action in any other judicial 
 district.
 (g) Personnel.--In accordance with regulations of the Secretary of 
Labor, the Secretary shall appoint, retain, and reasonably compensate 
accountants, actuaries, and other professional service personnel as may 
be necessary in connection with the Secretary's service as trustee 
under this section.

 Subtitle F--Health Plans

SEC. 1500. HEALTH PLAN DEFINED.

 (a) In General.--In this Act, the term ``health plan'' means a plan 
that provides the comprehensive benefit package and meets the 
requirements of this Act applicable to health plans.
 (b) State-Certified Health Plan.--In this Act, the term ``State-
certified health plan'' means a health plan that has been certified by 
a State under section 1504 (or, in the case in which the Board is 
exercising certification authority under this title, that has been 
certified by the Board).
 (c) Domiciliary State.--For purposes this section, the State which 
has certified a cooperative is the State in which the cooperative is 
domiciled.

 PART 1--REQUIREMENTS FOR HEALTH PLANS

SEC. 1501. CERTIFIED HEALTH PLAN.

 (a) In General.--To be certified under this title a health plan 
must meet the applicable standards under section 1503 for a certified 
health plan.
 (b) Special Rules for Large Group Purchasers.--Employer sponsored 
health plans offered by large group purchasers shall meet applicable 
standards in accordance with subtitle E.
 (c) Construction.--Whenever in this title a requirement or standard 
is imposed on a health plan, the requirement or standard is deemed to 
have been imposed on the insurer or health plan sponsor of the plan in 
relation to that plan.

SEC. 1502. APPLICATION OF REQUIREMENTS.

 No plan shall be treated under this Act as a health plan--
 (1) unless the plan is an employer sponsored health plan or 
 a State-certified plan; or
 (2) on and after the effective date of a finding by the 
 applicable regulatory authority that the plan has failed to 
 comply with such applicable requirements.

SEC. 1503. ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS.

 In order for a health plan to be eligible to be certified as a 
health plan by a State, the health plan shall meet the requirements of 
this Act, as described in regulations promulgated by the Board or the 
Secretary, including standards requiring that the plan shall--
 (1) provide for the effective delivery of covered services 
 throughout each designated service area for which it is 
 certified;
 (2) provide for coverage of the comprehensive benefits 
 package described in subtitle B;
 (3) provide for the collection and reporting of data;
 (4) not discriminate in enrollment or benefits;
 (5) establish community-rated premiums for the 
 comprehensive benefits;
 (6) meet financial solvency and financial management 
 standards promulgated by the Board;
 (7) provide for effective grievance procedures;
 (8) demonstrate an ability to ensure that enrollees have 
 adequate access to providers of health care;
 (9) meet information, disclosure and marketing 
 requirements;
 (10) meet requirements for open enrollment, availability, 
 and renewability;
 (11) meet requirements with respect to rural and 
 underserved areas;
 (12) meet requirements with respect to participation in a 
 payment adjustment program;
 (13) meet quality standards;
 (14) enter into agreements with cooperatives; and
 (15) meet other applicable requirements of this Act 
 pursuant to the Board or to regulations promulgated by the 
 Secretary.

SEC. 1504. CERTIFICATION AND REVOCATION OF HEALTH PLAN CERTIFICATION.

 (a) Certification.--A participating State shall--
 (1) certify each health plan, review the continued 
 compliance of each plan with the certification requirements and 
 recertify each plan not less frequently than once during every 
 3-year period if the State determines that the plan continues 
 to meet the criteria for certification, including demonstrating 
 that the policies of the plan have not discriminated on the 
 basis of any of the categories described in section 1914; and
 (2) review enrollee disenrollment from health plans in 
 order to determine whether there is a pattern of disenrollment 
 that does not reflect the distribution of such plans' 
 reenrolling members with respect to age, income, health 
 condition, prior utilization of health services, place of 
 residence and other potential risk characteristics.
Evidence of any of the disenrollment patterns described in paragraph 
(2) may be cause for the denial of a certification or for the 
application of one or more interim sanctions described in section 1505.
 (b) Revocation.--The State may revoke a plan's certification as a 
certified health plan for any health care coverage area or refuse to 
recertify a plan only upon a determination by the State that the health 
plan no longer meets the requirements of this section, pursuant to 
procedures established by the Board.

SEC. 1505. MONITORING.

 A participating State shall monitor the performance of each State-
certified health plan to ensure that it continues to meet the criteria 
for certification. If during such monitoring the State determined that 
a health plan fails to deliver care of adequate quality, either with 
respect to the overall enrollment population or the vulnerable 
population, fails to meet applicable standards relating to financial 
solvency and stability, or fails to meet any other criteria for 
certification or recertification, the State shall impose sanctions on 
the plan. Such sanctions may include fines and the limitation or 
prohibition of further enrollment until such time as the plan develops 
and complies with a corrective action plan.

SEC. 1506. ASSOCIATION HEALTH PLANS.

 (a) Application.--This section shall apply to any association 
health plan that is in operation on June 1, 1994 and that meets the 
requirements for being considered an multiple employer welfare 
arrangement under section 3(40) of the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002(40)).
 (b) Application of Standards.--An association health plan shall 
meet the requirements of a State-certified community-rated health plan.
 (c) Requirements.--The sponsoring entity of the association health 
plan--
 (1) shall be organized and maintained in good faith, with 
 appropriate bylaws that specifically state the purpose, as a 
 trade association, industry association, professional 
 association, chamber of commerce, a religious organization, or 
 a public entity association and that the entity has been 
 established and maintained for substantial purposes other than 
 to provide the health care required under this section; and
 (2) is and has been in operation (together with its 
 immediate predecessor, if any) for a continuous period of not 
 less than 3 years and receives the active support of its 
 membership.
 (d) Treatment of Existing Entities.--Any arrangement that, as of 
June 1, 1994, has been in effect for not less than 18 months and with 
respect to which there is a pending application with the State 
insurance commissioner for a certificate of operation as a health plan, 
shall be treated for purposes of this subtitle as a qualified health 
plan (if such plan otherwise meets the requirements of this Act) unless 
the State can demonstrate that--
 (1) fraudulent or material misrepresentations have been 
 made by the sponsor in the application;
 (2) the plan that is the subject of the application, on its 
 face, fails to meet the requirements for a complete 
 application; or
 (3) a financial impairment exists with respect to the 
 applicant that is sufficient to demonstrate the applicant's 
 inability to continue its operations.
 (e) Treatment of Multiple Employer Welfare Arrangements.--
 (1) MEWAs.--The Secretary of Labor shall promulgate 
 regulations that prohibit the insuring of employees under a 
 multiple employer welfare arrangement as defined under section 
 3(40) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 
 (29 U.S.C. 1002(40)) unless the arrangement meets the standards 
 for an association health plan under subtitle F or is certified 
 by a State or a consumer purchasing cooperative in accordance 
 with subtitle D.
 (2) Repeal of erisa provisions.--
 (A) Paragraph (40) of section 3 of such Act (29 
 U.S.C. 1002(40)) is repealed.
 (B) Paragraph 6 of section 514(b) of such Act (29 
 U.S.C. 1144(b)(6)) is repealed.

SEC. 1507. SPECIFIED STANDARD BENEFITS; SUPPLEMENTAL BENEFITS AND COST-
 SHARING POLICIES.

 (a) Standard Benefits and Other Requirements.--A State shall not 
accept the certification of a health plan as a certified health plan 
unless the plan provides the comprehensive benefits package required 
under this Act.
 (b) Treatment of Supplementary Health Benefits.--
 (1) In general.--Subsection (a) shall not be construed as 
 preventing a health plan, carrier, or insurer from offering (in 
 a manner that is separate from the offering of health plans) 
 supplemental insurance policies, pursuant to the State 
 certification plan and regulations promulgated by the Board.
 (2) No duplicative health benefits.--A health plan or any 
 other carrier or insurer may not offer any policy for 
 supplementary health benefits under paragraph (1) that 
 duplicates the comprehensive benefits or is linked in any 
 manner to the plan's comprehensive benefits package.
 (3) Regulation of supplemental plans.--The Secretary shall 
 provide appropriate rules for the regulation of supplemental 
 benefit policies and plans, including rules providing for the 
 guaranteed issue and the community rating of supplemental 
 policies.
 (c) Treatment of Cost-Sharing Policies.--
 (1) Rules for offering of policies.--A cost sharing policy 
 may be offered to an individual only if--
 (A) the policy is offered by the certified health 
 plan in which the individual is enrolled;
 (B) the certified health plan offers the policy to 
 all individuals enrolled in the plan;
 (C) the plan offers each such individual a choice 
 of a policy that provides standard coverage and a 
 policy that provides maximum coverage (in accordance 
 with standards established by the Board); and
 (D) the policy is offered only during the annual 
 open enrollment period for community-rated health plans 
 (described in section 1516).
 (2) Prohibition of coverage of copayments.--Each cost 
 sharing policy may not provide any benefits relating to any 
 copayments established under subtitle B.
 (3) Equivalent coverage for all services.--Each cost 
 sharing policy must provide coverage for items and services in 
 the comprehensive benefit package to the same extent as the 
 policy provides coverage for all items and services in the 
 package.
 (4) Requirements for pricing.--
 (A) In general.--The price of any cost sharing 
 policy shall--
 (i) be the same for each individual to whom 
 the policy is offered;
 (ii) take into account any expected 
 increase in utilization resulting from the 
 purchase of the policy by individuals enrolled 
 in the community-rated health plan; and
 (iii) not result in a loss-ratio of less 
 than 90 percent.
 (B) Loss-ratio defined.--In subparagraph (A)(iii), 
 a ``loss-ratio'' is the ratio of the premium returned 
 to the consumer in payout relative to the total premium 
 collected.

SEC. 1508. COLLECTION, PROVISION OF STANDARDIZED INFORMATION, AND 
 CONFIDENTIALITY.

 Each health plan must provide information required in accordance 
with subtitles A and B of title V.

SEC. 1509. PROHIBITION OF DISCRIMINATION.

 (a) In General.--Each health plan shall comply with the 
antidiscrimination requirements of section 1914.
 (b) Antidiscrimination.--
 (1) In general.--No health plan may discriminate on the 
 basis of--
 (A) the method through which a family seeks 
 enrollment under the plan; or
 (B) the provider's status as a member of a health 
 care profession for the purposes of selecting among 
 providers of health services for participation in a 
 provider network, provided that the State authorizes 
 members of that profession to render the services in 
 question and that such services are covered in the 
 comprehensive benefits package described in subtitle B.
 (2) Rule of construction.--Nothing in paragraph (1)(B) 
 shall be construed as requiring any health plan to--
 (A) include in a network any individual provider;
 (B) establish any defined ratio of different 
 categories of health professionals;
 (C) maintain any specific reimbursement methodology 
 other than that which is established in other 
 provisions of this Act; and
 (D) establish any specific utilization review or 
 internal quality standards other than that required in 
 other provisions of this Act.

SEC. 1510. QUALITY ASSURANCE STANDARDS.

 (a) In General.--Each health plan shall comply with the plan 
performance standards in accordance with subtitle A of title V. Each 
health plan shall establish procedures, including ongoing quality 
improvement procedures, to ensure that the health care services 
provided to enrollees under the plan will be provided under reasonable 
standards of quality of care consistent with prevailing professionally 
recognized standards of medical practice and the quality standards 
established under subtitle A of title V.
 (b) Internal Quality Assurance Program.--Each health plan shall 
establish, and communicate to its enrollees and its providers, an 
ongoing internal program, including periodic reporting, to monitor and 
evaluate the quality and cost effectiveness of its health care 
services, pursuant to standards established by the National Quality 
Council.

SEC. 1511. COMMUNITY-RATING.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall promulgate regulations for 
community rating as modified by age. Such regulations pertaining to 
adjustments in the community rate for age shall terminate on December 
31, 1998, except that the Board at any time may make a recommendation 
to Congress to maintain a form of modified community rating during the 
transition.
 (b) Marketing Fees.--Notwithstanding this section, a health plan 
may impose a marketing fee for individuals enrolling in a plan through 
an agent. Such fees shall be a uniform percentage of the premium 
established under section 6102(a)(1). In no case shall a plan impose a 
marketing fee for individuals enrolled through a cooperative or through 
a direct enrollment process established pursuant to section 1660.

SEC. 1512. FINANCIAL SOLVENCY REQUIREMENTS AND CONSUMER PROTECTION 
 AGAINST PROVIDER CLAIMS.

 (a) Solvency Protection.--Each health plan shall meet financial 
solvency requirements to assure protection of enrollees with respect to 
potential insolvency. Health plans must provide a financial plan and 
meet capital requirements established by the Board under section 1651. 
Health plans may utilize reinsurance, provide risk sharing, and other 
appropriate measures established by the Board.
 (b) Protection Against Provider Claims.--In the case of a failure 
of a health plan to make payments with respect to the comprehensive 
benefits for any reason, an individual who is enrolled under the plan 
is not liable to any health care provider with respect to the provision 
of health services within such set of benefits for payments in excess 
of the amount for which the enrollee would have been liable if the plan 
were to have made payments in a timely manner.

SEC. 1513. GRIEVANCE MECHANISMS.

 A health plan shall establish grievance procedures that enrollees 
may utilize in pursuing complaints in accordance with subtitle C of 
title V.

SEC. 1514. ACCESS TO CARE.

 (a) Point-Of-Service Option.--Each health plan that is a low-cost 
sharing plan (as described in section 1131) shall offer enrollees the 
opportunity to obtain coverage for out-of-network items and services, 
except that such point-of-service option must be offered, and priced 
separately from the benefits offered through the plan's network. A 
health plan providing coverage to an enrollee for out-of-network items 
and services may charge an alternative premium and require alternative 
cost-sharing to take into account such coverage, consistent with 
regulations promulgated by the Secretary.
 (b) Treatment of Cost-Sharing.--Each health plan, in providing 
benefits in the comprehensive benefit package shall include in its 
payments to providers such additional reimbursement as may be necessary 
to reflect cost sharing reductions to which individuals are entitled 
under section 1281.
 (c) Definitions.--
 (1) In-network items and services.--For purposes of this 
 Act, the term ``in-network'', when used with respect to items 
 or services described in this subtitle, means items or services 
 provided to an individual enrolled under a health plan by a 
 health care provider who is a member of a provider network of 
 the plan (as defined in paragraph (3)).
 (2) Out-of-network items and services.--For purposes of 
 this Act, the term ``out-of network'', when used with respect 
 to items or services described in this subtitle, means items or 
 services provided to an individual enrolled under a health plan 
 by a health care provider who is not a member of a provider 
 network of the plan (as defined in paragraph (3)).
 (3) Provider network defined.--A ``provider network'' 
 means, with respect to a health plan, providers who have 
 entered into an agreement with the plan under which such 
 providers are obligated to provide items and services in the 
 comprehensive benefit package to individuals enrolled in the 
 plan, or have an agreement to provide services on a fee-for-
 service basis.
 (4) Network plan defined.--For purposes of this Act, a 
 ``network plan'' means a health plan that utilizes a provider 
 network described in paragraph (3) and that meets the 
 requirements of section 1523(c).
 (d) Relation to Detention.--A health plan is not required to 
provide any reimbursement to any detention facility for services 
performed in that facility for detainees in the facility.

SEC. 1515. INFORMATION AND MARKETING STANDARDS.

 (a) In General.--Each health plan shall provide information in 
accordance with sections 1205 and 1603(e), other applicable information 
requirements of this Act and rules promulgated by the Board.
 (b) Marketing Methods; Advertising Materials.--A health plan may 
utilize direct marketing, agency, or other arrangements to distribute 
health plan information, subject to applicable State fair marketing 
practices laws and standards established by the State, including 
standards to prevent selective marketing. All advertising, promotional 
materials, and other communications with health plan members and the 
general public must be factually accurate and responsive to the needs 
of served populations. A health plan may not distribute marketing 
materials to an area smaller than the entire designated service area of 
the plan.
 (c) Payment of Agent Commissions.--A health plan--
 (1) may pay a commission or other remuneration to an agent 
 or broker in marketing the plan to individuals or groups, but
 (2) may not vary such remuneration based, directly or 
 indirectly, on the anticipated or actual claims experience 
 associated with the group or individuals to which the plan was 
 sold.
 (d) Materials in Appropriate Languages.--In the case of a health 
care coverage area that includes a significant number or proportion of 
residents with limited English proficiency, the State shall provide all 
materials under this Act at an appropriate reading level and in the 
native languages of such residents, as appropriate.

SEC. 1516. ENROLLMENT; AVAILABILITY, AND RENEWABILITY.

 (a) Enrollment Requirements.--Each health plan shall establish an 
enrollment process consistent with this paragraph. To be certified as a 
health plan, the plan shall accept the enrollment of every eligible 
individual who seeks such enrollment (including individuals enrolling 
directly with the plan or through a cooperative) and comply with all 
rules and procedures regarding enrollment established by the State and 
by the Board. No plan may engage in any practice that has the effect of 
attracting or limiting enrollees on the basis of personal 
characteristics, such as occupation or affiliation with any person or 
entity, or those characteristics described in section 1914.
 (b) No Limits on Coverage; No Pre-Existing Condition Limits.--A 
health plan may not--
 (1) terminate, restrict, or limit coverage for the 
 comprehensive benefit package in any portion of the plan's 
 service area, except as provided in this section;
 (2) cancel coverage for any community rate eligible 
 individual until that individual is enrolled in another 
 applicable health plan;
 (3) exclude any eligible individual from coverage because 
 of existing medical conditions or genetic predisposition to 
 medical conditions;
 (4) impose waiting periods before coverage begins; or
 (5) impose a rider that serves to exclude coverage of 
 particular eligible individuals.
 (c) Renewability; Limitation on Termination.--Coverage of eligible 
individuals, except as provided in this section, under a health plan in 
a health care coverage area shall be renewed at the option of such 
eligible individuals, and coverage may not be terminated except after 
notice and in accordance with subsection (g).
 (d) Capacity Limitations.--
 (1) In general.--With the approval of the applicable 
 regulatory authority, a health plan may limit enrollment 
 because of the plan's capacity to deliver services or to 
 maintain financial stability. If such a limitation is imposed, 
 the limitation may not be imposed on a basis referred to in 
 subsection (a).
 (2) Restrictions.--If such a limitation is imposed--
 (A) the plan may only enroll individuals under the 
 plan consistent with priorities established by the 
 State consistent with paragraph (3); and
 (B) the plan may not discriminate based on the 
 method through which a family seeks enrollment under 
 the plan.
 (3) State oversight.--Each State shall, in accordance with 
 rules promulgated by the Board, establish procedures and 
 methods to assure equal opportunity of enrollment for all 
 families, regardless of when during the open enrollment period 
 or the method by which the enrollment has been sought.
 (e) Treatment of Network Plans.--
 (1) Geographic limitations.--A health plan which is a 
 network plan as defined in section 1514(c)(4) may deny 
 enrollment under the plan to an eligible individual who is 
 located outside a service area of the plan, but only if such 
 denial is applied uniformly.
 (2) Service areas.--The State shall establish standards, 
 consistent with guidelines promulgated by the Secretary, for 
 the designation by network plans of service areas in order to 
 prevent discrimination in violation of section 1914.
 (f) Termination of Plans.--A health plan may elect not to renew or 
make available a health plan in a health care coverage area, or not to 
utilize a particular type of delivery system in a health care coverage 
area, but only if the health plan--
 (1) elects not to renew all of its health plans in such 
 health care coverage area or not to use the delivery system in 
 such health care coverage area; and
 (2) provides notice to the State and each individual 
 covered under the plan of such termination at least 180 days 
 before the date of expiration of either the plan or use of the 
 delivery system.
In such case, a health plan may not provide for the issuance of any 
health plan in such health care coverage area, or to utilize such 
delivery system in that health care coverage area during a 5-year 
period beginning on the date of the termination of the last plan not so 
renewed. For purposes of this paragraph the term ``delivery system'' 
means an open-network, closed network, or nonnetwork health care 
delivery system.

SEC. 1517. ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.

 (a) Capability.--Each health plan shall demonstrate to the 
certifying authority the capability to administer the plan.
 (b) Utilization Management.--Each health plan shall demonstrate to 
the certifying authority, through written management procedures, an 
appropriate utilization management process. The Secretary shall 
establish guidelines under this subsection for utilization management.

SEC. 1518. INFORMATION REGARDING A PATIENT'S RIGHT TO SELF-
 DETERMINATION IN HEALTH CARE SERVICES.

 Each health plan shall provide written information to each 
individual enrolling in such plan of such individual's right under 
State law (whether statutory or as recognized by the courts of the 
State) to make decisions concerning medical care, including the right 
to accept or refuse medical treatment and the right to formulate 
advance directives (as defined in section 1866(f)(3) of the Social 
Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395cc(f)(3))), and the written policies of the 
qualified health plan with respect to such right.

SEC. 1519. RURAL AND MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED AREAS.

 (a) In General.--If, in accordance with appropriate rules 
established by the Secretary, a State determines that there is 
inadequate access in the provision of health services by health plans 
in any area of a State, the State may authorize--
 (1) a health plan to be the only health plan in the area; 
 or
 (2) two or more health plans to take joint action to 
 develop and implement a program.
 (b) Medically Underserved Area Defined.--For purposes of this 
subtitle the term ``medically underserved area'' means an urban or 
rural area designated by the Board as an area with a shortage of health 
professionals or of health services or facilities.

SEC. 1520. PAYMENT ADJUSTMENTS.

 Each health plan shall participate in any risk adjustment, 
reinsurance, or other premium adjustment program implemented by the 
State in accordance with section 1641. Provisions of this section 
concerning risk adjustment and reinsurance shall not apply to health 
plans offered by large group purchasers.

SEC. 1521. PREEMPTION OF CERTAIN STATE LAWS RELATING TO HEALTH PLANS.

 (a) Laws Restricting Plans Other Than Fee-for-Service Plans.--
Except as may otherwise be provided in this section, no State law shall 
apply to any services provided under a health plan that is not a fee-
for-service plan (or a fee-for-service component of a plan) if such law 
has the effect of prohibiting or otherwise restricting plans from--
 (1) limiting the number and type of health care providers 
 who participate in the plan;
 (2) requiring enrollees to obtain health services (other 
 than emergency services) from participating providers or from 
 providers authorized by the plan;
 (3) requiring enrollees to obtain a referral for treatment 
 by a specialized physician or health institution;
 (4) establishing different payment rates for participating 
 providers and providers outside the plan;
 (5) creating incentives to encourage the use of 
 participating providers; or
 (6) requiring the use of single-source suppliers for 
 pharmacy, non-serviced medical equipment, and other health 
 products and services.
 (b) Preemption of State Corporate Practice Acts.--Any State law 
related to the corporate practice of medicine and to provider ownership 
of health plans or other providers shall not apply to arrangements 
between health plans that are not fee-for-service plans and their 
participating providers.

SEC. 1522. CONTRACTS WITH CONSUMER PURCHASING COOPERATIVES.

 (a) Contracts with Cooperatives.--A certified health plan provided 
by a carrier shall enter into contracts with each cooperative in the 
designated service area served by the plan seeking such a contract.
 (b) Pricing.--No health plan shall offer a rate to a cooperative 
that is more than the filed per-capita community rate (as described in 
section 6000(a)(1)).

SEC. 1523. HEALTH PLAN ARRANGEMENTS WITH PROVIDERS.

 (a) Provider Verification.--Plans shall ensure that all health care 
providers reimbursed by the plan are authorized under State law to 
provide applicable services. Each health plan shall--
 (1) verify the credentials of practitioners and facilities;
 (2) ensure that all providers participating in the plan 
 meet applicable State licensing and certification standards;
 (3) ensure that each health care provider participating in 
 the plan annually discloses information regarding operations, 
 ownership, finances, and workforce necessary to evaluate the 
 providers compliance with this Act;
 (4) oversee the quality and performance of participating 
 providers, consistent with section 1510; and
 (5) investigate and resolve consumer complaints against 
 participating providers.
 (b) Requirements for Nonnetwork Plans.--Each health plan must enter 
into such agreements or have such other arrangements as may be 
necessary with an appropriate mix, number, and distribution of 
qualified health professionals to ensure the provision of all services 
covered by the comprehensive benefit package to eligible individuals 
enrolled in the plan.
 (c) Requirements for Network Plans.--A health plan that requires 
coinsurance for an out-of-network item or service shall comply with the 
following requirements:
 (1) Agreements.--Each health plan must enter into such 
 agreements or have such other arrangements as may be necessary 
 with an appropriate mix, number, and distribution of qualified 
 health professionals to ensure the provision of all services 
 covered by the comprehensive benefit package to eligible 
 individuals enrolled in the plan.
 (2) Gatekeeper.--With respect to each health plan that 
 utilizes a gatekeeper or similar process to approve health care 
 services prior to or following the provision of such services, 
 such gatekeepers shall include specialists or a care 
 coordinator from an interdisciplinary team if medically 
 necessary or appropriate given the nature, severity, or 
 complexity of each patient's chronic disease, disorder, or 
 other health condition.
 (3) Continued care.--Each health plan shall develop a 
 process to ensure the access of enrollees to--
 (A) obstetrician-gynecologists for medically 
 necessary or appropriate primary care without 
 gatekeeper approval prior to each visit, and
 (B) relevant specialists for the continued care of 
 patient-enrollees with chronic diseases, disorders, or 
 health conditions without gatekeeper approval prior to 
 each visit, when the continued care is medically 
 indicated.
 (4) Eligible centers of specialized treatment expertise.--
 (A) In general.--Each health plan shall provide 
 access through agreements (as defined in subparagraph 
 (B)) to eligible centers of specialized treatment 
 expertise (as defined in subparagraphs (C) and (D)), 
 including centers outside the health care coverage area 
 or State, to ensure that enrollees receive the 
 specialized treatment expertise of such centers when 
 medically indicated. For children such specialized 
 treatment expertise shall specifically be in 
 pediatrics. A health plan shall be deemed to be in 
 accordance with this paragraph if the agreement of such 
 plan provides that, with respect to health conditions 
 within the specialized treatment expertise of the 
 center involved, the plan will, at the enrollees 
 request--
 (i) refer medical cases involving such 
 conditions to such center;
 (ii) inform plan members of the 
 availability of referral care; and
 (iii) establish an appeal mechanism in 
 which plan participants may challenge denials 
 of referrals to such center or may request that 
 their specialized care be provided at an 
 alternative center as described in subparagraph 
 (E).
 (B) Agreements.--An agreement between a health plan 
 and a center of specialized treatment expertise shall--
 (i) be a written provider participation 
 agreement with the center; or
 (ii) be a written agreement under which the 
 plan shall make payment to the center such that 
 services provided will be reimbursable at the 
 plan's normal rate for equivalent services or, 
 with respect to a plan that does not pay 
 providers on a fee-for-service basis, based on 
 payment methodologies and rates used under the 
 applicable methodology and rates or the most 
 closely applicable Medicare payment 
 methodologies under such program as the 
 Secretary may specify in regulations.
 (C) Specialized treatment expertise.--For purposes 
 of this subtitle, the term ``specialized treatment 
 expertise'', with respect to the treatment of a health 
 condition by an eligible center, means expertise in 
 diagnosing and treating unusual diseases or conditions, 
 diagnosing and treating diseases or conditions which 
 are unusually difficult to diagnose or treat, and 
 providing other specialized health care.
 (D) Eligible centers.--Eligible centers under this 
 paragraph shall be designated to diagnose and provide 
 care for patients with specified categories of 
 conditions and diseases. Such centers may include 
 academic health centers and teaching hospitals, and 
 other designated centers and systems of advanced care 
 that meet strict objective criteria established by the 
 Secretary including--
 (i) specialized credentials for caring for 
 patients with the specified categories of 
 conditions and diseases;
 (ii) staff with experience in caring for a 
 significant number of patients with the 
 specified categories of conditions and 
 diseases; and
 (iii) excellent measured outcomes in the 
 diagnosis and treatment of patients with the 
 specified categories of conditions and 
 diseases.
 (E) Access to alternative centers.--
 (i) In general.--Patients in need of 
 specialized treatment expertise may request 
 that specialized care be provided at an 
 alternative center. As used in this 
 subparagraph, the term ``alternative center'' 
 means a center of specialized treatment 
 expertise with which the health plan of the 
 patient does not have a written agreement as 
 described in subparagraph (B). Plans shall have 
 a procedure for making decisions regarding such 
 requests and have an appeals process for 
 patients who are refused coverage at an 
 alternative center for specialized treatment.
 (ii) Reimbursement.--Care provided at an 
 alternative center shall be reimbursed by the 
 health plan at the plan's normal rate for 
 equivalent services or, with respect to a plan 
 that does not pay providers on a fee-for-
 service basis, based on payment methodologies 
 and rates used under the applicable methodology 
 and rates or the most closely applicable 
 Medicare payment methodologies under such 
 program as the Secretary may specify in 
 regulations.
 (F) Limitation.--A State may not establish rules or 
 policies that require or encourage health plans to give 
 preference to centers of specialized treatment 
 expertise within the State or within the health care 
 coverage area. A health plan shall not prohibit an 
 academic health center, teaching hospital, or other 
 center for specialized care with which it contracts 
 from contracting with one or more other plans.
 (d) Emergency and Urgent Care Services.--
 (1) In general.--Each health plan must cover emergency and 
 urgent care services provided to enrollees, without regard to 
 whether or not the provider furnishing such services has a 
 contractual (or other) arrangement with the plan to provide 
 items or services to enrollees of the plan and in the case of 
 emergency services without regard to prior authorization.
 (2) Payment amounts.--In the case of emergency and urgent 
 care provided to an enrollee outside of a health plan's service 
 area, the payment amounts of the plan shall be based on the 
 applicable fee schedule described in subsection (e).
 (e) Application of Fee Schedule.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), each 
 qualified health plan that provides for payment for services on 
 a fee-for-service basis and has not established an agreement or 
 contractual arrangement with providers specifying a basis for 
 payment shall make such payment to such providers under a fee 
 schedule established by the plan.
 (2) Rule of construction.--Nothing in the paragraph (1) 
 shall be construed to prevent a health plan from providing for 
 a different basis or level of payment than the fee schedule 
 established under such paragraph as part of a contractual 
 agreement with participating providers under the plan.
 (3) Reduction for providers voluntarily reducing charges.--
 If a provider under a health plan voluntarily agrees to reduce 
 the amount charged to an individual enrolled under the plan, 
 the plan shall reduce the amount otherwise determined under the 
 fee schedule applicable under paragraph (1) by the proportion 
 of the reduction in such amount charged.
 (4) Reduction for noncomplying plan.--Each community-rated 
 health plan that is a noncomplying plan shall provide for 
 reductions in payments under the fee schedule to providers that 
 are not participating providers in accordance with section 
 6012(b).
 (f) Prohibition Against Balance Billing; Requirement of Direct 
Billing.--
 (1) Prohibition of balance billing.--A provider may not 
 charge or collect from an enrollee a fee in excess of the 
 applicable payment amount under the applicable fee schedule 
 under subsection (e), and the health plan and its enrollees are 
 not legally responsible for payment of any amount in excess of 
 such applicable payment amount for items and services covered 
 under the comprehensive benefits package.
 (2) Direct billing.--
 (A) In general.--A provider may not charge or 
 collect from an enrollee amounts that are payable by 
 the health plan (including any cost sharing reduction 
 assistance payable by the plan) and shall submit 
 charges to such plan in accordance with any applicable 
 requirements of subtitle B of title V (relating to 
 health information systems).
 (B) Prohibition.--An individual or entity that 
 performs ancillary health services, such as clinical 
 laboratory services or other services as defined by the 
 Secretary, may not present or cause to be presented, a 
 claim, bill, or demand for payment to any person other 
 than the individual receiving such services, or to the 
 health plan of the individual, except that the 
 Secretary may by regulation establish appropriate 
 exceptions to the requirement of this subparagraph.
 (3) Coverage under agreements with plans.--The agreements 
 or other arrangements entered into under section 1514(c)(2) 
 between a health plan and the health care providers providing 
 the comprehensive benefit package to individuals enrolled with 
 the plan shall prohibit a provider from engaging in balance 
 billing described in paragraph (1).
 (4) Rule of construction.--Nothing in this Act shall be 
 construed to--
 (A) require or force an individual to receive 
 health care solely through the individual's health 
 plan; or
 (B) prohibit any individual from privately 
 contracting with any health care provider and paying 
 for the treatment or service provided by such provider 
 on a cash basis or any other basis as agreed to between 
 the individual and the provider.
 (g) Imposition of Participating Provider Assessment in Case of a 
Noncomplying Plan.--Each community-rated health plan shall provide that 
if the plan is a noncomplying plan for a year under section 6012, 
payments to participating providers shall be reduced by the applicable 
network reduction percentage under such section.
 (h) Providers Outside Area.--A State may not limit the ability of 
any plan to contract with a provider of health services located outside 
of the geographic boundaries of a health care coverage area or the 
State, so long as the provider is authorized under State law to provide 
such services.

SEC. 1524. HEALTH SECURITY CARDS.

 Each health plan shall issue a health security card to each 
individual enrolled in such plan in accordance with subtitle B of title 
V and regulations promulgated by the Board.

SEC. 1525. UTILIZATION MANAGEMENT PROTOCOLS AND PHYSICIAN INCENTIVE 
 PLANS.

 (a) Requiring Consumer Disclosure.--Each health plan shall disclose 
to enrollees (and prospective enrollees) and providers the protocols 
and financial incentives used by the plan, including utilization 
management protocols and physician incentive plans (as defined in 
subsection (b)), for controlling utilization and costs.
 (b) Utilization Management.--Each health plan shall provide that 
all treatment assessment and placement decisions, or review of such 
decisions, shall be made by personnel--
 (1) licensed, certified or otherwise credentialed by the 
 State in the field for which the assessment or treatment is 
 sought; and
 (2) qualified to review utilization of the specific 
 treatment delivered.
 (c) Physician Incentive Plan Defined.--As used in this section, the 
term ``physician incentive plan'' means any compensation arrangement 
between a health plan, a utilization management organization or other 
organization and a physician or physician group that may directly or 
indirectly have the effect of reducing or limiting services provided 
with respect to individuals enrolled with the organization.
 (d) Limitations on Physician Incentive Plans.--A health plan, or 
any provider or group of providers with whom the health plan contracts, 
may not operate a physician incentive plan (as defined in subsection 
(c)) unless the following requirements are complied with:
 (1) The physician incentive plan provides that no specific 
 payment may be made directly or indirectly under the plan to a 
 physician or physician group or utilization management 
 organization as an inducement to reduce or limit medically 
 necessary or appropriate services provided to individuals 
 enrolled with the organization.
 (2) If the health plan places a physician or physician 
 group at financial risk for services not provided by the 
 physician or physician group, the physician incentive plan 
 shall provide stop-loss protection for the physician or 
 physician group that is adequate and appropriate, based on 
 standards developed by the Board that take into account the 
 number of physicians placed at such financial risk in the group 
 or under the plan and the number of individuals enrolled with 
 the organization who receive services from the physician or the 
 physician group.
 (3) The health plan and any physician or physician group 
 with whom the health plan contracts shall provide the Board 
 with descriptive information regarding the physician incentive 
 plan, sufficient to permit the Board to determine whether the 
 plan is in compliance with the requirements of this subsection.

 PART 2--REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO ESSENTIAL COMMUNITY PROVIDERS

SEC. 1531. HEALTH PLAN REQUIREMENT.

 (a) In General.--Each health plan shall, with respect to each 
electing essential community provider (as defined in subsection (d), 
other than a provider of school health services) located within the 
plan's service area, either--
 (1) enter into a written provider participation agreement 
 (described in subsection (b)) with the provider, or
 (2) enter into a written agreement under which the plan 
 shall make payment to the provider in accordance with 
 subsection (c).
 (b) Participation Agreement.--A participation agreement between a 
health plan and an electing essential community provider under this 
subsection shall provide that the health plan agrees to treat the 
provider in accordance with terms and conditions at least as favorable 
as those that are applicable to other providers participating in the 
health plan with respect to each of the following:
 (1) The scope of services for which payment is made by the 
 plan to the provider.
 (2) The rate of payment for covered care and services.
 (3) The availability of financial incentives to 
 participating providers.
 (4) Limitations on financial risk provided to other 
 participating providers.
 (5) Assignment of enrollees to participating providers.
 (6) Access by the provider's patients to providers in 
 medical specialties or subspecialties participating in the 
 plan.
 (c) Payments for Providers Without Participation Agreements.--
 (1) In general.--Payment in accordance with this subsection 
 is payment based, as elected by the electing essential 
 community provider, either--
 (A) on the fee schedule developed by the State; or
 (B) on payment methodologies and rates used under 
 the applicable Medicare payment methodology and rates 
 (or the most closely applicable methodology under such 
 program as the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 specifies in regulations).
 (2) Special rule for federally qualified health centers.--
 With respect to each federally qualified health center (as such 
 term is defined in section 1861(aa) of the Social Security Act) 
 that is an essential community provider, a health plan shall 
 make payments based on the reasonable cost rates applicable 
 under section 1833(a)(3) of the Social Security Act, except 
 that the federally qualified health center may accept other 
 payment amounts.
 (3) No application of gate-keeper limitations.--Payment in 
 accordance with this subsection may be subject to utilization 
 review, but may not be subject to otherwise applicable gate-
 keeper requirements under the plan.
 (d) Election.--
 (1) In general.--In this part, the term ``electing 
 essential community provider'' means, with respect to a health 
 plan, an essential community provider that elects this subpart 
 to apply to the health plan.
 (2) Form of election.--An election under this subsection 
 shall be made in a form and manner specified by the Secretary, 
 and shall include notice to the health plan involved. Such an 
 election may be made annually with respect to a health plan, 
 except that the plan and provider may agree to make such an 
 election on a more frequent basis.
 (e) Special Rule for Providers of School Health Services.--A health 
plan shall pay, to each provider of school health services located in 
the plan's service area an amount determined by the Secretary for such 
services furnished to enrollees of the plan.

SEC. 1532. RECOMMENDATION ON CONTINUATION OF REQUIREMENT.

 (a) Studies.--In order to prepare recommendations under subsection 
(b), the Secretary shall conduct studies regarding essential community 
providers, including studies that assess--
 (1) the definition of essential community provider,
 (2) the sufficiency of the funding levels for providers, 
 including the special rule for federally qualified health 
 centers under section 1531(c)(2), for both covered and 
 uncovered benefits under this Act,
 (3) the effects of contracting requirements relating to 
 such providers on such providers, health plans, and enrollees,
 (4) the impact of the payment rules for such providers, and
 (5) the impact of national health reform on such providers.
 (b) Recommendations to Congress.--The Secretary shall submit to 
Congress, by not later than March 1, 2001, specific recommendations 
respecting whether, and to what extent, section 1531 should continue to 
apply to some or all essential community providers. Such 
recommendations may include a description of the particular types of 
such providers and circumstances under which such section should 
continue to apply.

 Subtitle G--Federal Responsibilities

 PART 1--NATIONAL HEALTH BOARD

 Subpart A--Establishment of National Health Board

SEC. 1601. CREATION OF NATIONAL HEALTH BOARD; MEMBERSHIP.

 (a) In General.--There is hereby created in the Executive Branch a 
National Health Board.
 (b) Composition.--The Board is composed of 9 members appointed by 
the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
 (c) Chair.--The President shall designate one of the members as 
chair. The chair serves a term concurrent with that of the President. 
The chair may serve a maximum of 3 terms. The chair shall serve as the 
chief executive officer of the Board.
 (d) Terms.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and 
 (4), the term of each member of the Board, except the chair, is 
 4 years and begins when the term of the predecessor of that 
 member ends.
 (2) Initial terms.--The initial terms of the members of the 
 Board (other than the chair) first taking office after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act, shall expire as designated by the 
 President, three at the end of one year, three at the end of 
 two years, and three at the end of three years.
 (3) Reappointment.--A member (other than the chair) may be 
 reappointed for one additional term.
 (4) Continuation in office.--Upon the expiration of a term 
 of office, a member shall continue to serve until a successor 
 is appointed and qualified.
 (e) Vacancies.--
 (1) In general.--Whenever a vacancy shall occur, other than 
 by expiration of term, a successor shall be appointed by the 
 President, by and with the consent of the Senate, to fill such 
 vacancy, and is appointed for the remainder of the term of the 
 predecessor.
 (2) No impairment of function.--A vacancy in the membership 
 of the Board does not impair the authority of the remaining 
 members to exercise all of the powers of the Board.
 (3) Acting chair.--The Board may designate a Member to act 
 as chair during any period in which there is no chair 
 designated by the President.
 (f) Meetings; Quorum.--
 (1) Meetings.--At meetings of the Board the chair shall 
 preside, and in the absence of the chair, the Board shall elect 
 a member to act as chair pro tempore.
 (2) Quorum.--Four members of the Board shall constitute a 
 quorum thereof.

SEC. 1602. QUALIFICATIONS OF BOARD MEMBERS.

 (a) Citizenship.--Each member of the Board shall be a citizen of 
the United States.
 (b) Basis of Selection.--Board members will be selected on the 
basis of their experience and expertise in relevant subjects, including 
the practice of medicine, nursing, or other clinical practices, health 
care financing and delivery, state health systems, consumer protection, 
business, law, and delivery of care to vulnerable populations, 
including children, individuals with disabilities, and individuals in 
rural and urban underserved areas.
 (c) Exclusive Employment.--During the term of appointment, Board 
members shall serve as employees of the Federal Government and shall 
hold no other employment.
 (d) Prohibition of Conflict of Interest.--A member of the Board may 
not have a pecuniary interest in or hold an official relation to any 
health care plan, health care provider, insurance company, 
pharmaceutical company, medical equipment company, or other affected 
industry. Before entering upon the duties as a member of the Board, the 
member shall certify under oath compliance with this requirement.
 (e) Post-Employment Restrictions.--After leaving the Board, former 
members are subject to post-employment restrictions applicable to 
comparable Federal employees.
 (f) Compensation of Board Members.--Each member of the Board (other 
than the chair) shall receive an annual salary at the annual rate 
payable from time to time for level IV of the Executive Schedule. The 
chair of the Board, during the period of service as chair, shall 
receive an annual salary at the annual rate payable from time to time 
for level III of the Executive Schedule.

SEC. 1603. GENERAL DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.

 (a) Comprehensive Benefit Package.--
 (1) Interpretation.--The Board shall interpret the 
 comprehensive benefit package, adjust the delivery of 
 preventive services under section 1153, and take such steps as 
 may be necessary to assure that the comprehensive benefit 
 package is available on a uniform national basis to all 
 eligible individuals.
 (2) Fiscal analysis by national health board.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than 6 months prior to 
 the effective date of this Act, the National Health 
 Board, in cooperation with the Congressional Budget 
 Office, shall undertake and conclude a fiscal analysis 
 of--
 (i) the cost of the comprehensive benefits 
 package under section 1101;
 (ii) the ability of the health care 
 system's cost containment mechanisms, as 
 defined in this Act, to control health care 
 spending and Federal health expenditures based 
 on current economic projections; and
 (iii) the impact of new health care 
 financial obligations under this Act on the 
 Federal budget deficit, in current economic 
 terms, and the source of any projected spending 
 increases, including those described in clauses 
 (i) and (ii), provider reimbursement rates, and 
 administrative expenses.
 (B) Submission or report.--The Board shall prepare 
 and submit a preliminary analysis under this paragraph 
 not later than January 1, 1997, and submit a final 
 report not later than July 1, 1997, and July 1 of each 
 year thereafter.
 (C) Requirement of report.--In a report submitted 
 under this paragraph, the Board shall specify the 
 source and amount of any Federal budget deficit 
 increases in order that Congress may more adequately 
 assess other sources of funding or spending reductions 
 that may be appropriate to maintain the benefit package 
 without adjustments.
 (D) Report.--Based on the fiscal analysis contained 
 in a report under this paragraph, if the Board 
 concludes that the Federal government's obligation to 
 contribute to the health care system (through the 
 provision of subsidies to employers and families) will 
 result in previously unprojected increases in the 
 Federal budget deficit, the Board shall report and make 
 corrective recommendations to the President and the 
 Congress.
 (3) Report and recommendations.--
 (A) In general.--If determined to be necessary by 
 the Board, in consultation with the Congressional 
 Budget Office, to prevent significant Federal deficit 
 increases attributable to the provisions of this Act 
 (or subsequent amendments to this Act), the Board shall 
 include in the reports under paragraph (2)(B), 
 adjustments in specific aspects of the comprehensive 
 benefits package (such as scope of benefits, co-
 payments, deductibles, and phase-in's for additional 
 benefits) to achieve savings consistent with the 
 findings in a report under paragraph (2).
 (B) No board adjustments.--If the report of the 
 Board under paragraph (2) contains no adjustments in 
 the benefit package, the benefit package described in 
 section 1101 shall become effective, except that the 
 President may take action under section 9100(e)(4) as 
 the President determines appropriate.
 (C) Board adjustments.--If the report of the Board 
 under paragraph (2) contains adjustments in the benefit 
 package, the adjustments shall apply unless a joint 
 resolution disapproving the adjustments is passed by 
 Congress within 45 legislative days of the date of the 
 submission of the report. The provisions of section 
 6006(d) shall apply to Congressional consideration of a 
 joint resolution considered under this paragraph.
 (D) Authority of president.--The requirements of 
 this section shall not be limited in any way by section 
 9100(e)(4) or any other provision of this Act.
 (4) Scope of recommendations.--The Board may make 
 adjustments in the services covered under the benefit package, 
 including any periodicity tables; copayment, deductible, and 
 out-of-pocket requirements; and phase-in schedules for 
 additional health benefits. The Board may not require co-
 payments for preventive health services, but may re-classify 
 services described in section 1101 as preventive services.
 (5) Recommendations.--The Board may recommend to the 
 President and the Congress appropriate revisions to such 
 package. Such recommendations may reflect changes in 
 technology, health care needs, health care costs, and methods 
 of service delivery.
 (b) Administration of Cost Containment Provisions.--The Board shall 
oversee the cost containment requirements of subtitle A of title VI and 
certify compliance with such requirements.
 (c) Coverage and Families.--The Board shall develop and implement 
standards relating to the eligibility of individuals for coverage in 
applicable health plans under subtitle A of title I and may provide 
such additional exceptions and special rules relating to the treatment 
of family members under section 1012 as the Board finds appropriate.
 (d) Quality Management and Improvement.--The Board shall establish 
and have ultimate responsibility for a performance-based system of 
quality management and improvement as required by section 5001.
 (e) Information System and Information related Functions.--
 (1) In general.--The Board shall--
 (A) develop and implement standards to establish a 
 national health information system to measure quality 
 as required by section 5101;
 (B) provide model format and content requirements 
 for summary plan descriptions; and
 (C) provide model format and content requirements 
 for comparative plan brochures under section 1205.
 (2) Information related functions.--
 (A) Designation.--The Board shall provide for the 
 use of entities in the national health data network to 
 perform information related functions under this 
 section with respect to employers, States, contracting 
 entities, and consumer purchasing cooperatives.
 (B) Functions.--The functions referred to in 
 subparagraph (A) shall include--
 (i) receipt of information submitted by 
 employers under section 1702,
 (ii) from the information received, 
 transmittal to States, and
 (iii) such other functions as the Board 
 specifies.
 (f) Participating State Requirements.--Consistent with the 
provisions of subtitle C, the Board shall--
 (1) establish requirements for participating States,
 (2) monitor State compliance with those requirements,
 (3) provide technical assistance, and
in a manner that ensures access to the comprehensive benefit package 
for all eligible individuals.
 (g) Development of Premium Class Factors.--The Board shall 
establish premium class factors under subpart D of this part.
 (h) Development of Reinsurance and Risk-Adjustment Methodology.--
The Board shall develop a methodology for the reinsurance and risk-
adjustment of premium payments to community-rated health plans in 
accordance with subpart E of this part.
 (i) Financial Requirements.--The Board shall establish minimum 
capital requirements and requirements for guaranty funds and financial 
reporting and auditing standards under subpart F of this part.
 (j) Standards for Health Plan Grievance Procedures.--The Board 
shall establish standards for health plan grievance procedures that are 
used by enrollees in pursuing complaints.
 (k) National Open Enrollment Periods.--The Board shall specify 
those periods which shall include a national, uniform open enrollment 
period, in which eligible individuals may change the applicable health 
plan in which they enrolled.
 (l) Fiduciary requirements.--The Board shall, in consultation with 
the Secretary of Labor, develop and promulgate fiduciary requirements 
for the management of funds by States, plans, cooperatives, and 
employers.

SEC. 1604. ANNUAL REPORT.

 (a) In General.--The Board shall prepare and send to the President 
and Congress an annual report addressing the overall implementation of 
the new health care system.
 (b) Matters To Be Included.--The Board shall include in each annual 
report under this section the following:
 (1) Information on Federal and State implementation.
 (2) Data related to quality improvement.
 (3) Recommendations or changes in the administration, 
 regulation and laws related to health care and coverage.
 (4) A full account of all actions taken during the previous 
 year.

SEC. 1605. POWERS.

 (a) Staff; Contract Authority.--The Board shall have authority, 
subject to the provisions of the civil-service laws and chapter 51 and 
subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, to appoint 
such officers and employees as are necessary to carry out its 
functions. To the extent provided in advance in appropriations Acts, 
the Board may contract with any person (including an agency of the 
Federal Government) for studies and analysis as required to execute its 
functions. Any employee of the Executive Branch may be detailed to the 
Board to assist the Board in carrying out its duties.
 (b) Establishment of Advisory Committees.--The Board may establish 
advisory committees, including committees to advise the Board on the 
health care needs of disadvantaged and vulnerable populations, 
including children and individuals with physical, cognitive and other 
mental disabilities.
 (c) Access to Information.--The Board may secure directly from any 
department or agency of the United States information necessary to 
enable it to carry out its functions, to the extent such information is 
otherwise available to a department or agency of the United States. 
Upon request of the chair, the head of that department or agency shall 
furnish that information to the Board.
 (d) Delegation of Authority.--Except as otherwise provided in this 
Act, the Board may delegate any function to such officers and employees 
as the Board may designate and may authorize such successive 
redelegations of such functions with the Board as the Board deems to be 
necessary or appropriate. No delegation of functions by the Board shall 
relieve the Board of responsibility for the administration of such 
functions.
 (e) Rulemaking.--The National Health Board is authorized to 
establish such rules as may be necessary to carry out this Act.

SEC. 1606. FUNDING.

 (a) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated to the Board such sums as may be necessary for fiscal 
years 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, and 1998.
 (b) Submission of Budget.--Under the procedures of chapter 11 of 
title 31, United States Code, the budget for the Board for a fiscal 
year shall be reviewed by the Director of the Office of Management and 
Budget and submitted to the Congress as part of the President's 
submission of the Budget of the United States for the fiscal year.

 Subpart B--Responsibilities Relating to Review and Approval of State 
 Systems

SEC. 1611. FEDERAL REVIEW AND ACTION ON STATE SYSTEMS.

 (a) Approval of State Systems by National Board.--
 (1) In general.--The National Health Board shall approve a 
 State health care system for which a document is submitted 
 under section 1200(b) unless the Board finds that the system 
 (as set forth in the document) does not (or will not) provide 
 for the State meeting the responsibilities for participating 
 States under this Act.
 (2) Regulations.--The Board shall issue regulations, not 
 later than July 1, 1995, prescribing the requirements for State 
 health care systems under subtitle C, except that in the case 
 of a document submitted under section 1200(b) before the date 
 of issuance of such regulations, the Board shall take action on 
 such document notwithstanding the fact that such regulations 
 have not been issued.
 (3) No approval permitted for years prior to 1996.--The 
 Board may not approve a State health care system under this 
 subpart for any year prior to 1996.
 (b) Review of Completeness of Documents.--
 (1) In general.--If a State submits a document under 
 subsection (a)(1), the Board shall notify the State, not later 
 than 7 working days after the date of submission, whether or 
 not the document is complete and provides the Board with 
 sufficient information to approve or disapprove the document.
 (2) Additional information on incomplete document.--If the 
 Board notifies a State that the State's document is not 
 complete, the State shall be provided such additional period 
 (not to exceed 45 days) as the Board may by regulation 
 establish in which to submit such additional information as the 
 Board may require. Not later than 7 working days after the 
 State submits the additional information, the Board shall 
 notify the State respecting the completeness of the document.
 (c) Action on Completed Documents.--
 (1) In general.--The Board shall make a determination (and 
 notify the State) on whether the State's document provides for 
 implementation of a State system that meets the applicable 
 requirements of subtitle C--
 (A) in the case of a State that did not require the 
 additional period described in subsection (b)(2) to 
 file a complete document, not later than 90 days after 
 notifying a State under subsection (b) that the State's 
 document is complete, or
 (B) in the case of a State that required the 
 additional period described in subsection (b)(2) to 
 file a complete document, not later than 90 days after 
 notifying a State under subsection (b) that the State's 
 document is complete.
 (2) Review of coverage area.--The Board shall review State 
 designation of health care coverage area boundaries to 
 determine whether such boundaries comply with sections 1202 and 
 1914, and in particular, the requirements of such sections 
 concerning non-discrimination in the establishment of coverage 
 area boundaries.
 (3) Plans deemed approved.--If the Board does not meet the 
 applicable deadline for making a determination and providing 
 notice under paragraph (1) with respect to a State's document, 
 the Board shall be deemed to have approved the State's document 
 for purposes of this Act.
 (d) Opportunity to Respond to Rejected Document.--
 (1) In general.--If (within the applicable deadline under 
 subsection (c)(1)) the Board notifies a State that its document 
 does not provide for implementation of a State system that 
 meets the applicable requirements of subtitle C, the Board 
 shall provide the State with a period of 30 days in which to 
 submit such additional information and assurances as the Board 
 may require.
 (2) Deadline for response.--Not later than 30 days after 
 receiving such additional information and assurances, the Board 
 shall make a determination (and notify the State) on whether 
 the State's document provides for implementation of a State 
 system that meets the applicable requirements of subtitle C.
 (3) Plan deemed approved.--If the Board does not meet the 
 deadline established under paragraph (2) with respect to a 
 State, the Board shall be deemed to have approved the State's 
 document for purposes of this Act.
 (e) Approval of Previously Terminated States.--If the Board has 
approved a State system under this part for a year but subsequently 
terminated the approval of the system under section 1612(b)(2), the 
Board shall approve the system for a succeeding year if the State--
 (1) demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Board that the 
 failure that formed the basis for the termination no longer 
 exists, and
 (2) provides reasonable assurances that the types of 
 actions (or inactions) which formed the basis for such 
 termination will not recur.
 (f) Revisions to State System.--
 (1) Submission.--A State may revise a system approved for a 
 year under this section, except that such revision shall not 
 take effect unless the State has submitted to the Board a 
 document describing such revision and the Board has approved 
 such revision.
 (2) Actions on amendments.--Not later than 60 days after a 
 document is submitted under paragraph (1), the Board shall make 
 a determination (and notify the State) on whether the 
 implementation of the State system, as proposed to be revised, 
 meets the applicable requirements of subtitle C. If the Board 
 fails to meet the requirement of the preceding sentence, the 
 Board shall be deemed to have approved the implementation of 
 the State system as proposed to be revised.
 (3) Rejection of amendments.--Subsection (d) shall apply to 
 an amendment submitted under this subsection in the same manner 
 as it applies to a completed document submitted under 
 subsection (b).
 (g) Notification of Non-Participating States.--If a State fails to 
submit a document for a State system by the deadline referred to in 
section 1200, or such a document is not approved under subsection (c), 
the Board shall immediately notify the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services of the State's failure for purposes of applying subpart C in 
that State.

SEC. 1612. FAILURE OF PARTICIPATING STATES TO MEET CONDITIONS FOR 
 COMPLIANCE.

 (a) In General.--In the case of a participating State, if the Board 
determines that the operation of the State system under subtitle C 
fails to meet the applicable requirements of this Act, sanctions shall 
apply against the State in accordance with subsection (b).
 (b) Type of Sanction Applicable.--The sanctions applicable under 
this part are as follows:
 (1) If the Board determines that the State's failure does 
 not substantially jeopardize the ability of eligible 
 individuals in the State to obtain coverage for the 
 comprehensive benefit package the Board shall notify the 
 Secretary who shall reduce payment with respect to the State in 
 accordance with section 1613.
 (2) If the Board determines that the failure substantially 
 jeopardizes the ability of eligible individuals in the State to 
 obtain coverage for the comprehensive benefit package--
 (A) the Board shall terminate its approval of the 
 State system; and
 (B) the Board shall notify the Secretary of Health 
 and Human Services, who shall assume the 
 responsibilities described in section 1622.
 (c) Termination of Sanction.--
 (1) Compliance by state.--A State against which a sanction 
 is imposed may submit information at any time to the Board to 
 demonstrate that the failure that led to the imposition of the 
 sanction has been corrected.
 (2) Termination of sanction.--If the Board determines that 
 the failure that led to the imposition of a sanction has been 
 corrected in the case of the sanction described in subsection 
 (b)(1)(A), the Board shall notify the Secretary of Health and 
 Human Services.
 (d) Protection of Access to Benefits.--The Board and the Secretary 
of Health and Human Services shall exercise authority to take actions 
under this section with respect to a State only in a manner that 
assures the continuous coverage of eligible individuals enrolled in 
community-rated health plans.

SEC. 1613. REDUCTION IN PAYMENTS FOR HEALTH PROGRAMS BY SECRETARY OF 
 HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES.

 (a) In General.--Upon receiving notice from the Board under section 
1612(b)(1)(B), the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall reduce 
the amount of any of the payments described in subsection (b) that 
would otherwise be made to individuals and entities in the State by 
such amount as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
 (b) Payments Described.--The payments described in this subsection 
are as follows:
 (1) Payments to academic health centers in the State under 
 subtitle B of title III.
 (2) Payments to individuals and entities in the State for 
 health research activities under section 301 and title IV of 
 the Public Health Service Act.
 (3) Payments to hospitals in the State under part 4 of 
 subtitle E of title III (relating to payments to hospitals 
 serving vulnerable populations)

SEC. 1614. REVIEW OF FEDERAL DETERMINATIONS.

 Any State affected by a determination by the Board under this 
subpart may appeal such determination in accordance with section 5231.

SEC. 1615. FEDERAL SUPPORT FOR STATE IMPLEMENTATION.

 (a) Planning Grants.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall make available 
 to each State a planning grant to assist a State in the 
 development of a health care system to become a participating 
 State under subtitle C.
 (2) Formula.--The Secretary shall establish a formula for 
 the distribution of funds made available under this subsection.
 (3) Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized 
 to be appropriated $50,000,000 in each of fiscal years 1995 and 
 1996 for grants under this subsection.
 (b) Grants for Start-up Support.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall make available to 
 States, upon their enacting enabling legislation to become 
 participating States, grants to assist in the establishment of 
 consumer purchasing cooperatives.
 (2) Formula.--The Secretary shall establish a formula for 
 the distribution of funds made available under this subsection.
 (3) State matching funds required.--Funds are payable to a 
 State under this subsection only if the State provides 
 assurances, satisfactory to the Secretary, that amounts of 
 State funds (at least equal to the amount made available under 
 this subsection) are expended for the purposes described in 
 paragraph (1).
 (4) Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized 
 to be appropriated $313,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, 
 $625,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, and $313,000,000 for fiscal 
 year 1998 for grants under this subsection.

 Subpart C--Responsibilities in Absence of State Systems

SEC. 1621. APPLICATION OF SUBPART.

 (a) Initial Application.--This subpart shall apply with respect to 
a State as of January 1, 1998, unless--
 (1) the State submits a document for a State system under 
 section 1611(a)(1) by July 1, 1997, and
 (2) the Board determines under section 1611 that such 
 system meets the requirements of part 1 of subtitle C.
 (b) Termination of Approval of System of Participating State.--In 
the case of a participating State for which the Board terminates 
approval of the State system under section 1612(b)(2), this subpart 
shall apply with respect to the State as of such date as is appropriate 
to assure the continuity of coverage for the comprehensive benefit 
package for eligible individuals in the State.

SEC. 1622. FEDERAL ASSUMPTION OF RESPONSIBILITIES IN NON-PARTICIPATING 
 STATES.

 (a) Notice.--When the Board determines that this subpart will apply 
to a State for a calendar year, the Board shall notify the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services.
 (b) Establishment of Community-Rating System.--Upon receiving 
notice under subsection (a), the Secretary shall take such steps as are 
necessary to ensure that the comprehensive benefit package is provided 
to eligible individuals in the State during the year.
 (c) Establishment of Guaranty Fund.--
 (1) Establishment.--The Secretary must ensure that there is 
 a guaranty fund that meets the requirements established by the 
 Board under section 1652, in order to provide financial 
 protection to health care providers and others in the case of a 
 failure of a community-rated health plan under a health care 
 system established and operated by the Secretary under this 
 section.
 (2) Assessments to provide guaranty funds.--In the case of 
 a failure of one or more community-rated health plans, the 
 Secretary may require each community-rated health plan to pay 
 an assessment to the Secretary in an amount not to exceed 2 
 percent of the premiums of such plans paid by or on behalf of 
 community rate eligible individuals during a year for so long 
 as necessary to generate sufficient revenue to cover any 
 outstanding claims against the failed plan.

SEC. 1623. IMPOSITION OF SURCHARGE ON PREMIUMS UNDER FEDERALLY-OPERATED 
 SYSTEM.

 (a) In General.--If this subpart applies to a State for a calendar 
year, the premiums charged by community-rated health plans in the State 
shall be equal to premiums that would otherwise be charged, increased 
by 15 percent. Such 15 percent increase shall be used to reimburse the 
Secretary for any administrative or other expenses incurred as a result 
of establishing and operating the system.
 (b) Treatment of Surcharge as Part of Premium.--For purposes of 
determining the compliance of a State for which this subpart applies in 
a year with the requirements for budgeting under subtitle A of title VI 
for the year, the 15 percent increase described in subsection (a) shall 
be treated as part of the premium for payment to a State.

SEC. 1624. RETURN TO STATE OPERATION.

 (a) Application Process.--After the establishment and operation of 
a system by the Secretary in a State under section 1622, the State may 
at any time apply to the Board for the approval of a State system in 
accordance with the procedures described in section 1611.
 (b) Timing.--If the Board approves the system of a State for which 
the Secretary has operated during a year, the Secretary shall terminate 
the operation of the system, and the State shall establish and operate 
its approved system, as of January 1 of the first year beginning after 
the Board approves the State system. The termination of the Secretary's 
system and the operation of the State's system shall be conducted in a 
manner that assures the continuous coverage of eligible individuals in 
the State under community-rated health plans.

 Subpart D--Establishment of Class Factors for Charging Premiums

SEC. 1631. PREMIUM CLASS FACTORS.

 (a) In General.--For each class of family enrollment (as specified 
in section 1011(c)), for purposes of title VI, the Board shall 
establish a premium class factor that reflects, subject to subsection 
(b), the relative actuarial value of the comprehensive benefit package 
of the class of family enrollment compared to such value of such 
package for individual enrollment.
 (b) Conditions.--In establishing such factors, the factor for the 
class of individual enrollment shall be 1 and the factor for the 
couple-only class of family enrollment shall be 2.

 Subpart E--Risk Adjustment and Reinsurance Methodology for Payment of 
 Plans

SEC. 1641. DEVELOPMENT OF A RISK ADJUSTMENT AND REINSURANCE 
 METHODOLOGY.

 (a) Development.--
 (1) Initial development.--Not later than April 1, 1995, the 
 Board shall develop a risk adjustment and reinsurance 
 methodology in accordance with this subpart.
 (2) Improvements.--The Board shall make such improvements 
 in such methodology as may be appropriate to achieve the 
 purposes described in subsection (b)(1).
 (b) Risk Adjustment Methodology.--
 (1) Purposes.--Such risk adjustment methodology shall 
 provide for the adjustment of payments to community-rated 
 health plans for the purposes of--
 (A) assuring that payments to such plans reflect 
 the expected relative utilization and expenditures for 
 such services by each plan's enrollees compared to the 
 average utilization and expenditures for community rate 
 eligible individuals, and
 (B) protecting health plans that enroll a 
 disproportionate share of community rate eligible 
 individuals with respect to whom expected utilization 
 of health care services (included in the comprehensive 
 benefit package) and expected health care expenditures 
 for such services are greater than the average level of 
 such utilization and expenditures for community rate 
 eligible individuals.
 (2) Factors to be considered.--In developing such risk 
 adjustment methodology, the Board shall take into account the 
 following factors:
 (A) Demographic characteristics.
 (B) Health status, including prior use of health 
 services.
 (C) Geographic area of residence.
 (D) Socio-economic status.
 (E) Subject to paragraph (5), (i) the proportion of 
 enrollees who are SSI recipients and (ii) the 
 proportion of enrollees who are AFDC recipients.
 (F) Any other factors determined by the Board to be 
 material to the purposes described in paragraph (1).
 (3) Zero sum.--The risk adjustment methodology shall assure 
 that the total payments to health plans after application of 
 the methodology are the same as the amount of payments that 
 would have been made without application of the methodology.
 (4) Treatment of ssi/afdc adjustment.--The Board is not 
 required to apply the factor described in clause (i) or (ii) of 
 paragraph (2)(E) if the Board determines that the application 
 of the other risk adjustment factors described in paragraph (2) 
 is sufficient to adjust premiums to take into account the 
 enrollment in plans of AFDC recipients and SSI recipients.
 (5) Special consideration for mental illness and mental 
 retardation.--In developing the methodology under this section, 
 the Board shall give consideration to the unique problems of 
 adjusting payments to health plans with respect to individuals 
 with mental illness and mental retardation.
 (6) Special consideration for veterans, military, and 
 indian health plans.--In developing the methodology under this 
 section, the Board shall give consideration to the special 
 enrollment and funding provisions relating to plans described 
 in section 1004(b).
 (7) Adjustment to account for use of estimates.--If the 
 total payments made to all community-rated health plans in a 
 year under section 1239 exceeds, or is less than, the total of 
 such payments estimated by the State in the application of the 
 methodology under this subsection, because of a difference 
 between--
 (A) the State's estimate of the distribution of 
 enrolled families in different risk categories (assumed 
 in the application of risk factors under this 
 subsection in making payments to community-rated health 
 plans), and
 (B) the actual distribution of such enrolled 
 families in such categories,
 the methodology under this subsection shall provide for an 
 adjustment in the application of such methodology in the second 
 succeeding year in a manner that would reduce, or increase, 
 respectively, by the amount of such excess (or deficit) the 
 total of such payments made to all such plans.
 (c) Mandatory Reinsurance.--
 (1) In general.--The methodology developed under this 
 section shall include a system of mandatory reinsurance as a 
 component of the risk adjustment methodology.
 (2) Requirement in certain cases.--The Board shall reduce 
 or eliminate such a system of reinsurance at such time as the 
 Board determines that an adequate prospective payment 
 adjustment for health status has been developed and is ready 
 for implementation.
 (3) Reinsurance system.--The Board, in developing the 
 methodology for a mandatory reinsurance system under this 
 subsection, shall--
 (A) provide for health plans to make payments to 
 state-established reinsurance programs for the purpose 
 of eliminating incentives for plans to discriminate 
 against individuals on the basis of their expected 
 utilization of health services; and
 (B) specify the manner of creation, structure, and 
 operation of the system in each State, including--
 (i) the manner (which may be prospective or 
 retrospective) in which health plans make 
 payments to the system, and
 (ii) the type and level of reinsurance 
 coverage provided by the system.
 (d) Confidentiality of Information.--The methodology shall be 
developed in a manner consistent with privacy standards promulgated 
under section 5120(a). In developing such standards, the Board shall 
take into account any potential need of States for certain individually 
identifiable health information in order to carry out risk-adjustment 
and reinsurance activities under this Act, but only to the minimum 
extent necessary to carry out such activities and with protections 
provided to minimize the identification of the individuals to whom the 
information relates.
 (e) State Experimentation.--The Board is authorized to undertake 
experimentation with alternative reinsurance and risk adjustments 
methods in one or more different States, with the approval of the 
States adopting such experiments, to determine the most appropriate 
method to be used on a national basis.
 (f) State-Specific Adjusters.--States may, with the approval of the 
Board, add such risk adjusters to the national risk adjustment and 
reinsurance methodology that reflect State specific patters of disease 
or population characteristics.

SEC. 1642. INCENTIVES TO ENROLL DISADVANTAGED GROUPS.

 The Board shall establish standards under which States may provide 
(under section 1203) for an additional adjustment in the risk-
adjustment methodology developed under section 1641 in order to provide 
a financial incentive for community-rated health plans to enroll 
individuals who are members of disadvantaged groups or populations 
vulnerable to discrimination due to their health status.

SEC. 1643. RESEARCH AND DEMONSTRATIONS.

 The Secretary shall conduct and support research and demonstration 
projects to develop and improve, on a continuing basis, the risk 
adjustment and reinsurance methodology under this subpart.

SEC. 1644. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE TO STATES.

 The Board shall provide technical assistance to States in 
implementing the methodology developed under this subpart.

 Subpart F--Responsibilities for Financial Requirements

SEC. 1651. CAPITAL STANDARDS FOR COMMUNITY-RATED PLANS.

 (a) In General.--The Board shall establish, in consultation with 
the States, minimum capital requirements for carriers, for purposes of 
section 1512.
 (b) $500,000 Minimum.--Subject to subsection (c), under such 
requirements there shall be not less than $500,000 of capital 
maintained for each carrier.
 (c) Additional Capital Requirements.--The Board shall establish 
standards that provide for additional capital. The amount of such 
additional capital required shall reflect factors likely to affect the 
financial stability of a carrier, including the following:
 (1) Projected plan enrollment and number of providers 
 participating in plans of the carrier.
 (2) Market share and strength of competition.
 (3) Extent and nature of risk-sharing with participating 
 providers and the financial stability of risk-sharing 
 providers.
 (4) Prior performance of the carrier, risk history, and 
 liquidity of assets.
 (d) Community- and Provider-Based Plans.--
 (1) In general.--States shall consider alternative 
 financial instruments and methods for community- and provider-
 based plans (as defined in paragraph (2)) to meet the capital 
 and solvency standards developed in accordance with this 
 section. Provisions made for such plans shall ensure the fiscal 
 integrity and financial solvency of such plans.
 (2) Eligible plans.--Plans eligible for special 
 consideration by States must be public or not-for-profit 
 entities that are owned, or in which a majority share of the 
 plan's investment is held by--
 (A) health care providers who practice in the plan;
 (B) individuals who live in the area, or not-for-
 profit organizations located in the area serviced by 
 the plan;
 (C) a combination of individuals and organizations 
 described in subparagraphs (A) and (B); or
 (D) organizations located outside the service area 
 which provide for control over local operations by 
 individuals described in subparagraphs (A) or (B).
 (e) Development of Standards by NAIC.--The Board may request the 
National Association of Insurance Commissioners to develop model 
standards for the additional capital requirements described in 
subsection (c) and to present such standards to the Board not later 
than July 1, 1995. The Board may accept such standards as the standards 
to be applied under subsection (c) or modify the standards in any 
manner it finds appropriate.

SEC. 1652. STANDARD FOR GUARANTY FUNDS.

 (a) In General.--In consultation with the States, the Board shall 
establish standards for guaranty funds established by States.
 (b) Guaranty Fund Standards.--The standards established under 
subsection (a) for a guaranty fund shall include the following:
 (1) Each fund must have a method to generate sufficient 
 resources to pay health providers and others in the case of a 
 failure of a health plan in order to meet obligations with 
 respect to--
 (A) services rendered by the health plan for the 
 comprehensive benefit package, including any 
 supplemental coverage for cost sharing provided by the 
 health plan, and
 (B) services rendered prior to health plan 
 insolvency and services to patients after the 
 insolvency but prior to their enrollment in other 
 health plans.
 (2) The fund is liable for all claims against the plan by 
 health care providers with respect to their provision of items 
 and services covered under the comprehensive benefit package to 
 enrollees of the failed plan. Such claims, in full, shall take 
 priority over all other claims. The fund also is liable, to the 
 extent and in the manner provided in accordance with rules 
 established by the Board, for other claims, including other 
 claims of such providers and the claims of contractors, 
 employees, governments, or any other claimants.
 (3) The fund stands as a creditor for any payments owed the 
 plan to the extent of the payments made by the fund for 
 obligations of the plan.
 (4) The fund has authority to borrow against future 
 assessments in order to meet the obligations of failed plans 
 participating in the fund.

 Subpart G--Open Enrollment

SEC. 1660. PERIODS OF AUTHORIZED CHANGES IN ENROLLMENT.

 (a) Annual Open Enrollment Period.--
 (1) In general.--For purposes of section 1211 and section 
 1502(a)(1), in order to encourage periodic family choice in the 
 selection of health plans, the National Health Board shall 
 specify a uniform, national annual open enrollment period 
 during which all eligible individuals are permitted the 
 opportunity to change enrollment among the health plans offered 
 to them under this Act.
 (2) Effectiveness of change of enrollment.--Except as the 
 National Health Board may provide, changes in enrollment during 
 an annual open enrollment period under paragraph (1) shall take 
 effect as of the first date of the following year.
 (b) Additional Periods of Authorized Changes in Enrollment.--The 
National Health Board also shall specify--
 (1) such other periods and occurrences (including the 
 insolvency of carriers or large group purchasers, changes in 
 residence, and appropriate changes in employment) for which an 
 individual is authorized to change enrollment in health plans, 
 and
 (2) when such change of enrollment becomes effective.
 (c) Direct Enrollment.--
 (1) In general.--The Board shall establish methods and 
 procedures for the direct enrollment of individuals in the 
 health plans of their choice.
 (2) Enrollment processes.--The Board shall provide 
 standards for State to ensure the broad availability of 
 enrollment forms, including direct enrollment through the mail, 
 and other such processes as the Board may designate.
 (3) No marketing fee.--Individuals enrolling in plans 
 through the processes described in paragraph (2) shall be 
 eligible for the community-rated premium (described in section 
 6000) filed by the health plan selected by the individual, 
 without incurring a marketing fee, a surcharge or any other 
 payment that represents an addition to the community-rated 
 premium, whether such charge is imposed by the health plan, an 
 agent of the plan, or any other entity.
 (d) Disenrollment for Cause.--
 (1) In general.--In addition to the annual open enrollment 
 period held under subsection (a), the Board shall establish 
 procedures by which eligible individuals enrolled in a plan may 
 disenroll from the plan for good cause (as defined by Board) at 
 any time during a year and enroll in another plan. Such 
 procedures shall be implemented by participating States in a 
 manner that ensures continuity of coverage for the 
 comprehensive benefit package for such individuals during the 
 year.
 (2) Disenrollment for cause.--
 (A) In general.--In addition to the periods of 
 authorized change in enrollment under paragraph (1), 
 the National Health Board shall define good cause and 
 establish procedures under which eligible individuals 
 enrolled in a health plan provided by a carrier may 
 disenroll from the plan for good cause at any time 
 during a year and enroll in another applicable health 
 plan.
 (B) Assuring continuity of coverage.--The 
 procedures under this paragraph shall be implemented in 
 a manner that ensures continuity of coverage for the 
 comprehensive benefit package for individuals changing 
 enrollment during the year.
 (C) Additional remedies.--The Board may provide 
 rules under which an individual who changes enrollment 
 from a plan for good cause due to a pattern of 
 underservice under a plan, the carrier providing the 
 health plan is liable, to the subsequent health plan in 
 which the individual is enrolled, for excess costs (as 
 identified in accordance with such rules) during a 
 reasonable period of the anticipated duration of 
 enrollment with the original health plan.
 (e) Change of Enrollment.--In this section and subtitle E, the term 
``change of enrollment'' includes, with respect to an individual--
 (1) a change in the health plan in which the individual is 
 enrolled,
 (2) a change in the type of family enrollment, and
 (3) the enrollment of the individual at the time the 
 individual first becomes an eligible individual.
 (f) Provider-Based Enrollment Mechanisms.--The Board shall 
promulgate rules regarding the establishment by States of provider-
based enrollment mechanisms for individuals seeking care who are not 
enrolled in a health plan. Such rules shall include provisions 
requiring health plans to pay providers for care delivered to 
individuals prior to the individual's enrollment in the plan.
 (g) Coordination of Enrollment Activities.--Each State shall 
coordinate its activities, including plan enrollment and disenrollment 
activities, with other States in a manner specified by the National 
Health Board that ensures continuous, nonduplicative coverage of 
community-rated and experience-rated individuals in health plans and 
that minimizes administrative procedures and paperwork.

SEC. 1661. DISTRIBUTION OF COMPARATIVE INFORMATION.

 The Board shall specify a period of time prior to open enrollment 
during which States must provide for the distribution to community-rate 
eligible individuals enrollment materials and comparative information 
on health plans.

 PART 2--RESPONSIBILITIES OF DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES

 Subpart A--General Responsibilities

SEC. 1671. GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF SECRETARY OF HEALTH AND HUMAN 
 SERVICES.

 (a) In General.--Except as otherwise specifically provided under 
this Act (or with respect to administration of provisions in the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 or in the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act of 1974), the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall 
administer and implement all of the provisions of this Act, except 
those duties delegated to the National Health Board, any other 
executive agency, or to any State.
 (b) Financial Management Standards.--The Secretary, in consultation 
with the Secretaries of Labor and the Treasury, shall establish, for 
purposes of section 1512, standards relating to the management of 
finances, maintenance of records, accounting practices, auditing 
procedures, and financial reporting for States, consumer purchasing 
cooperatives and health plans. Such standards shall take into account 
current Federal laws and regulations relating to fiduciary 
responsibilities and financial management of funds.
 (c) Auditing State Performance.--The Secretary shall perform 
periodic financial and other audits of States to assure that such 
States are carrying out their responsibilities under this Act 
consistent with this Act. Such audits shall include audits of State 
performance in the areas of--
 (1) assuring enrollment of all community rate eligible 
 individuals in health plans,
 (2) management of premium and cost sharing discounts and 
 reductions provided;
 (3) financial management (including the financial 
 activities of cooperatives and State-designated contracting 
 entities); and
 (4) assuring enforcement of the antidiscrimination 
 provisions of this Act.
 (d) Standards for Utilization Management Programs.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 12 months after the date of 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary, in consultation with 
 interested parties which may include one or more accrediting 
 organizations, shall promulgate uniform Federal standards for 
 utilization management programs, to include the activities 
 described in section 1210(b).
 (2) Compliance.--States shall ensure compliance with the 
 Federal standards established under paragraph (1), consistent 
 with their role in certifying health plans.
 (3) Review and update.--The Secretary shall periodically 
 review and update utilization management standards to reflect 
 appropriate policies and practices in health care delivery.

SEC. 1672. MEDICAL TECHNOLOGY IMPACT STUDY.

 (a) Assessment of the Comprehensive Impact of Medical 
Technologies.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the 
 Administrator of the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research 
 (hereafter referred to in this section as the 
 ``Administrator''), shall undertake an interdisciplinary study 
 (to be known as the ``Medical Technology Impact Study'') to 
 assess the overall economic costs, economic benefits, and 
 effect on patient outcomes of medical technologies used in 
 treating each of a list of target diseases and conditions. The 
 Secretary shall submit the report of the Administrator to 
 Congress (in accordance with subsection (c)) concerning the 
 results of the study and may provide any recommendations 
 determined to be necessary to ensure the availability, access, 
 and appropriate use of medical technologies to improve the 
 quality of health care in the United States.
 (2) Purpose.--The purpose of the study under paragraph (1) 
 is to assess the impact of old, new and emerging medical 
 technologies on health care costs, social costs, and patient 
 outcomes, and to identify the factors, including government and 
 private payor reimbursement policies, that impede or encourage 
 innovation that improves patient outcomes. Congress intends 
 that the study complement the technology assessment, outcomes 
 research, and guideline development activities authorized under 
 title IX of the Public Health Service Act by providing a 
 comprehensive context for understanding the economic and social 
 factors related to the development and use of medical 
 technologies.
 (3) Definitions.--As used in this section:
 (A) Economic benefits.--The term economic benefits 
 may include, based on available data--
 (i) reductions in the economic costs of 
 disease;
 (ii) increases in employment attributable 
 to the medical technology industry;
 (iii) increases in Federal and State tax 
 revenues attributable to the medical technology 
 industry and its employees;
 (iv) improvements in the balance of trade 
 deficit attributable to the medical technology 
 industry; and
 (v) other benefits that are determined by 
 the Advisory Committee to be relevant to 
 assessing the impact of medical technology.
 (B) Economic costs.--The term ``economic costs'' 
 may include, based on available data--
 (i) the financial costs to the health care 
 system of diagnosing and treating disease, 
 including the costs of nontreatment and 
 palliative care;
 (ii) the financial costs to employers 
 resulting from worker illness, including the 
 costs of productivity losses and worker 
 absenteeism;
 (iii) the financial costs to families 
 resulting from illness of a family member, 
 including costs associated with loss of income, 
 hiring of caretakers, and long term and hospice 
 care;
 (iv) the financial costs to government of 
 illness, including reductions in income tax 
 revenues attributable to worker illness and 
 worker related injuries and increases in 
 transfer payments, including unemployment, 
 disability, welfare, and survivor benefit 
 payments, made to individuals and families on 
 account of illness; and
 (v) other costs that are determined by the 
 Advisory Committee to be relevant to assessing 
 the impact of medical technology.
 (C) Patient outcomes.--The term ``patient 
 outcomes'' may include--
 (i) changes in clinical outcomes, including 
 stabilization of patients with progressive 
 disease or health conditions, resulting from 
 the use of safe and effective medical 
 technology in prevention, diagnosis, or 
 treatment;
 (ii) changes in mortality, morbidity, and 
 health service use, including stabilization of 
 patients with progressive diseases;
 (iii) changes in quality of life, including 
 ability to perform activities of daily living, 
 ability to return to work, relief from 
 discomfort or pain, alleviation of fatigue, and 
 improved mental functioning and well-being; and
 (iv) other outcomes that are determined by 
 the advisory committee to be relevant to 
 assessing the impact of medical technology.
 (D) Medical technologies.--The term ``medical 
 technologies'' includes drugs, biologics (including 
 vaccines), medical devices, drug delivery systems, and 
 surgical services and other procedures for preventing, 
 diagnosing, and treating diseases or health conditions.
 (E) Medical technology industry.--The term 
 ``medical technology industry'' includes the 
 biotechnology, pharmaceutical, and medical device 
 industries, and such other industries that invent, 
 develop, or market medical technologies.
 (b) Advisory Committee.--
 (1) In general.--The Administrator shall establish an 
 Advisory Committee to assist the Agency in preparing the 
 reports required under subsection (c). Except as provided in 
 paragraph (3), no member of the advisory committee shall be an 
 employee of the Federal Government.
 (2) Membership.--The Advisory Committee shall be balanced 
 in its representation of interested parties and shall be 
 composed of at least two individuals appointed by the President 
 of the Institute of Medicine and two individuals from each of 
 the following categories:
 (A) Experts in medical technology assessment.
 (B) Experts in objective measures of improved 
 patient outcomes, such as clinical outcomes, mortality, 
 morbidity, and health service use.
 (C) Experts in subjective measures of improved 
 patient outcomes, such as quality of life.
 (D) Experts in quantifying the economic costs of 
 disease to the health care system, including public and 
 private payers.
 (E) Experts in quantifying the economic impact of 
 the medical technology industry.
 (F) Experts in health statistics and epidemiology.
 (G) Physicians and other health care providers.
 (H) Officers or employees of health plans and other 
 health care payers.
 (I) Experts in the ethical implications of health 
 care.
 (J) Experts in private sector financial market 
 investment in the medical technology industry.
 (K) Consumers and members of patient advocacy 
 groups.
 (L) Health professional organizations.
 (M) Officers or employees of biotechnology 
 companies.
 (N) Officers or employees of medical device 
 companies.
 (O) Officers or employees of pharmaceutical 
 companies.
 (3) Ex officio.--The following individuals or their 
 designees shall serve as ex officio members of the Advisory 
 Committee:
 (A) The Director of the National Institutes of 
 Health.
 (B) The Commissioner of Food and Drugs.
 (C) The Director of the Centers for Disease Control 
 and Prevention.
 (D) The Administrator of the Health Care Financing 
 Administration.
 (E) The Under Secretary of Commerce for Technology.
 (F) The Director of the Congressional Office of 
 Technology Assessment.
 (c) Interdisciplinary Study and Report.--
 (1) In general.--The Administrator, in consultation with 
 the Advisory Committee established under subsection (b), shall 
 determine which diseases or conditions should be studied in the 
 Medical Technology Impact Study. In carrying out the medical 
 technology assessment required under this subsection, the 
 Administrator shall consider various factors, including those 
 outlined in section 904(b)(2) of the Public Health Service Act 
 and government and private payor reimbursement policies that 
 impede or encourage innovation that improves patient outcomes. 
 The diseases or conditions studied in such Study shall be those 
 considered to be high priority according to the following 
 criteria:
 (A) Aggregate economic costs to the United States.
 (B) Overall importance to public heath.
 (C) Potential for improvements in patient outcomes.
 (D) Significant changes expected in management of 
 the condition.
 (E) Other criteria identified by the Advisory 
 Committee.
 (2) Design.--The Administrator, in consultation with the 
 Advisory Committee established under subsection (b), and the 
 Institute of Medicine pursuant to paragraph (3), shall develop 
 a design, based on the list of target diseases and conditions, 
 for undertaking the Medical Technology Impact Study.
 (3) Contract.--The Secretary shall request the Institute of 
 Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences to enter into a 
 contract to review the Study design and report to the 
 Administrator concerning any recommendations for revising such 
 design, in the interest of assuring that it reflects the best 
 available scientific methodologies.
 (4) Publication.--The Administrator shall publish the study 
 design and list of target diseases and conditions, the 
 recommendations of the Institute of Medicine, and the response 
 of the Administrator to such recommendations in the Federal 
 Register for a 60-day period for public comment. Any such 
 comments shall be considered by the Administrator in completing 
 the proposed study design for submission to the Secretary.
 (5) Design report.--The Secretary shall report to Congress 
 concerning the proposed design of the Medical Technology Impact 
 Study, together with recommendations for appropriations 
 necessary to carry out the Study.
 (6) Grants and contracts.--Beginning in the first fiscal 
 year for which Congress appropriates funds consistent with 
 paragraph (5), and ending on September 30 of that year, the 
 Administrator shall enter into grants and contracts with 
 appropriate entities to conduct any investigations and analyses 
 that may be required to carry out the design of the Medical 
 Technology Impact Study.
 (7) Report on findings.--The Administrator, in consultation 
 with the Advisory Committee, shall develop a draft 
 comprehensive report concerning the findings of the Study, 
 shall make copies of the draft report available to the public 
 and publish a notice in the Federal Register providing for a 
 60-day period of public comment. Any such comments shall be 
 considered by the Administrator in completing and submitting 
 the final report to the Secretary.
 (8) Final report.--Not later than 3 years after the date of 
 enactment of this section, the Secretary shall submit the 
 report of the Administrator to Congress, and may include any 
 recommendations determined necessary to assure the 
 availability, access and appropriate use of medical 
 technologies to improve the quality of health care in the 
 United States.
 (d) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be 
appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.

SEC. 1673. ASSISTANCE WITH FAMILY COLLECTIONS.

 The Secretary shall provide States with such technical and other 
assistance as may promote the efficient collection of other amounts 
owed by families under this Act. Such assistance may include the 
assessment of civil monetary penalties, not to exceed $5,000 or three 
times the amount of the liability owed, whichever is greater, in the 
case of repeated failure to pay (as specified in rules of the 
Secretary).

SEC. 1674. ADVISORY OPINIONS.

 (a) In General.--Community- and provider-based plans and 
individuals and organizations seeking to establish such plans shall be 
eligible to receive advisory opinions from appropriate Federal 
entities, including opinions concerning whether their arrangement 
complies with Federal self-referral, fraud and abuse, and anti-trust 
laws.
 (b) Regulations.--The Secretary shall issue regulations setting 
forth the procedures for obtaining advisory opinions described in 
subsection (a).
 (c) Timing of Opinions.--Advisory opinions shall be issued not 
later than 90 days after receipt of a request for such opinions from a 
plan.
 (d) Fees.--Applicants shall pay a fee, the amount of which to be 
determined by the Secretary, to cover the costs of providing the 
opinion.

SEC. 1675. REPORTS.

 (a) Dental Care.--The Secretary shall undertake studies to 
determine--
 (1) the costs of providing--
 (A) preventive dental care to all adults;
 (B) restorative dental care to all adults; and
 (C) preventive dental care to adults with 
 developmental, cognitive, and other mental 
 disabilities; and
 (2) the best oral health care practice and the cost or 
 savings of providing such care prior to 2001. The Secretary 
 shall report to the National Health Board and the Congress not 
 later than September 1, 1995 concerning such study.
 (b) In Vitro Fertilization.--The Secretary shall undertake a study 
to determine the costs of providing coverage for in vitro fertilization 
in the comprehensive benefits package. The Secretary shall report to 
the National Health Board and the Congress not later than September 1, 
1995 concerning such study.

 Subpart B--Certification of Essential Community Providers

SEC. 1681. CERTIFICATION.

 For purposes of this Act, the Secretary shall certify as an 
``essential community provider'' any health care provider or 
organization that--
 (1) is within any of the categories of providers and 
 organizations specified in section 1682(a), or
 (2) meets the standards for certification under section 
 1683(a).

SEC. 1682. CATEGORIES OF PROVIDERS AUTOMATICALLY CERTIFIED.

 (a) In General.--The categories of providers and organizations, 
including subrecipients, specified in this subsection are as follows:
 (1) Covered entities as defined in section 340B(a)(4) of 
 the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 256b(a)(4)), except 
 that subsections (a)(4)(L)(iii) and (a)(7) of such section 
 shall not apply.
 (2) School health services centers under title III of this 
 Act.
 (3)(A) Nonprofit hospitals meeting the criteria for public 
 hospitals which are eligible entities under section 340B of the 
 Public Health Service Act, except that subsection 
 (a)(4)(L)(iii) of such section shall not apply.
 (B) Nonprofit hospitals with a minimum of 200 beds, located 
 in urban areas where--
 (i) the cumulative total of its services provided 
 to individuals who are entitled to benefits under title 
 XVIII of the Social Security Act or under a State plan 
 under title XIX of such Act equals a minimum of 65 
 percent; and
 (ii) a minimum of 20 percent of its services are 
 provided to individuals eligible for assistance under 
 such title XIX;
 (C) A Medicare dependent small rural hospital under section 
 1886(d)(8)(iii) of the Social Security Act.
 (D) Children's hospitals meeting comparable criteria 
 determined appropriate by the Secretary.
 (4) Public and private, nonprofit mental health and 
 substance abuse providers receiving funds under title V or XIX 
 of the Public Health Service Act.
 (5) Runaway homeless youth centers or transitional living 
 programs for homeless youth providing health services under the 
 Runaway Homeless Youth Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5701 et seq.).
 (6) Public or nonprofit maternal and child health providers 
 that receive funding under title V of the Social Security Act.
 (7) Rural health clinics as defined under section 
 1861(aa)(2) of the Social Security Act.
 (b) Study of Federally Certified Rural Health Clinics.--The 
Secretary shall conduct an evaluation of the Rural Health Clinics 
program as defined in section 1861(aa)(2) of the Social Security Act to 
examine the causes of the growth in the program and the characteristics 
of providers certified as rural health clinics and the characteristics 
of the population served by rural health clinics to ensure that the 
program meets the needs of rural underserved communities. The Secretary 
shall report the findings of such evaluation, together with any 
recommended changes in the rural health clinics program, to the 
Congress not later than January 1, 1996.

SEC. 1683. STANDARDS FOR ADDITIONAL PROVIDERS.

 (a) Standards.--The Secretary shall publish standards for the 
certification of additional categories of health care providers and 
organizations as essential community providers, including the 
categories described in subsection (b). Such a health care provider or 
organization shall not be certified unless the Secretary determines, 
under such standards, that health plans operating in the area served by 
the applicant would not otherwise be able to assure adequate access to 
items and services included in the comprehensive benefit package if 
such a provider was not so certified.
 (b) Categories To Be Included.--The categories described in this 
subsection are as follows:
 (1) Certain health professionals.--A health professional 
 who--
 (A) for at least 20 hours per week--
 (i) is located in an area (or areas) 
 designated as a health professional shortage 
 area (under section 332 of the Public Health 
 Service Act) or serves a population (or 
 populations) designated as a medically 
 underserved population (under section 330 of 
 the Public Health Service Act); or
 (ii)(I) is located or provides services in 
 a neighborhood or community whose residents are 
 at risk of underservice; and
 (II) is available to patients at such 
 location on evenings and weekends; and
 (B) if the health professional is a physician--
 (i) is licensed to practice in the 
 jurisdiction; and
 (ii) is either--
 (I) granted privileges to practice 
 at one or more hospitals; or
 (II) has a consultation and 
 referral arrangement with one or more 
 physicians who are granted privileges 
 to practice at one or more hospitals.
 (2) Institutional providers.--Public and private nonprofit 
 hospitals and other public and nonprofit institutional health 
 care providers, including family planning clinics, located in 
 health professional shortage areas (as defined under section 
 332 of the Public Health Service Act) or providing health 
 services to medically underserved populations (as defined under 
 title III of this Act).
 (3) Other providers.--Other public and private nonprofit 
 agencies and organizations that--
 (A) are located in such an area or providing health 
 services to such a population, and
 (B) provide health care and services essential to 
 residents of such an area or such populations.

SEC. 1684. CERTIFICATION PROCESS; REVIEW; TERMINATION OF 
 CERTIFICATIONS.

 (a) Certification Process.--
 (1) Publication of procedures.--The Secretary shall 
 publish, not later than 6 months after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the procedures to be used by health care 
 professionals, providers, agencies, and organizations seeking 
 certification under this subpart, including the form and manner 
 in which an application for such certification is to be made.
 (2) Timely determination.--The Secretary shall make a 
 determination upon such an application not later than 60 days 
 (or 15 days in the case of a certification for an entity 
 described in section 1682) after the date the complete 
 application has been submitted. The determination on an 
 application for certification of an entity described in section 
 1682 shall only involve the verification that the entity is an 
 entity described in such section.
 (b) Review of Certifications.--The Secretary shall periodically 
review whether professionals, providers, agencies, and organizations 
certified under this subpart continue to meet the requirements for such 
certification.
 (c) Termination or Denial of Certification.--
 (1) Preliminary finding.--If the Secretary preliminarily 
 finds that an entity seeking certification under this section 
 does not meet the requirements for such certification or such 
 an entity certified under this subpart fails to continue to 
 meet the requirements for such certification, the Secretary 
 shall notify the entity of such preliminary finding and permit 
 the entity an opportunity, under subtitle C of title V, to 
 rebut such findings.
 (2) Final determination.--If, after such opportunity, the 
 Secretary continues to find that such an entity continues to 
 fail to meet such requirements, the Secretary shall terminate 
 the certification and shall notify the entity, the State, large 
 group purchasers, of such termination and the effective date of 
 the termination.

SEC. 1685. NOTIFICATION OF PARTICIPATING STATES.

 (a) In General.--Not less often than annually the Secretary shall 
notify each participating State of essential community providers that 
have been certified under this subpart.
 (b) Contents.--Such notice shall include sufficient information to 
permit each State to notify health plans of the identity of each entity 
certified as an essential community provider, including--
 (1) the location of the provider within each plan's service 
 area,
 (2) the health services furnished by the provider, and
 (3) other information necessary for health plans to carry 
 out part 3 of subtitle E.

SEC. 1686. DEFINITIONS.

 As used in subpart:
 (1) Subrecipient.--The term ``subrecipient'' means, with 
 respect to a recipient of a grant under a particular authority, 
 an entity that--
 (A) is receiving funding from such a grant under a 
 contract with the principal recipient of such a grant, 
 and
 (B) meets the requirements established to be a 
 recipient of such a grant.
 (2) Health professional.--The term ``health professional'' 
 means a physician, nurse, nurse practitioner, certified nurse 
 midwife, physician assistant, psychologist, dentist, 
 pharmacist, chiropractor, clinical social worker, and other 
 health care professional recognized by the Secretary.
 (3) Children's hospital.--The term ``children's hospital'' 
 means those hospitals whose inpatients are certified by the 
 Secretary or the State to be predominantly under the age of 18.

 Subpart C--Workplace Wellness Programs

SEC. 1687. WORKPLACE WELLNESS PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall perform responsibilities 
required under this Act with respect to the development of 
certification criteria and other duties required under this Act 
relating to workplace wellness programs.
 (b) Application of Section.--Employers maintaining qualified 
worksite health promotion programs meeting the requirements of 
subsection (d) shall be entitled to the worksite health promotion 
rebate specified in subsection (c).
 (c) Worksite Health Promotion Rebate.--Employers maintaining a 
qualified worksite health promotion programs shall be paid a rebate by 
the State in an amount determined using the methodology developed by 
the Secretary.
 (d) Requirements for Qualified Worksite Health Promotion 
Programs.--
 (1) Establishment of levels.--The Secretary shall establish 
 not less than two levels of qualified worksite health promotion 
 programs and determine the program elements (or combination of 
 program elements) necessary for an employer to qualify at each 
 level. In establishing such levels, the Secretary shall take 
 into consideration the special characteristics of small 
 businesses (as defined in section 6123(c)) and incorporate 
 provisions providing small businesses the opportunity to 
 qualify at all levels.
 (2) Program elements.--Program elements that the Secretary 
 should consider for inclusion in qualified worksite health 
 promotion programs are the following:
 (A) Education, screening, counseling, follow-up, 
 treatment or referral programs to reduce lifestyle and 
 other modifiable risk factors such as cholesterol, 
 inactivity, nutrition and weight management, HIV, 
 sexually transmitted diseases, cancer prevention, or 
 smoking.
 (B) Education, screening, counseling, follow-up, 
 monitoring or referral for chronic health risks or 
 problems such as high blood pressure or diabetes.
 (C) Promotion of exercise and fitness through 
 education or the provision of exercise facilities at 
 the worksite, adjoining the worksite, or at a proximate 
 location with transportation provided from the 
 worksite.
 (D) Employee assistance programs that provide 
 counseling and assistance with respect to other areas 
 of personal concern that may adversely affect job 
 performance such as substance abuse, stress or 
 parenting.
 (E) Workplace health and safety education and 
 prevention programs that go beyond those required by 
 law.
 (F) Prenatal counseling and education.
 (G) Consumer education regarding health care 
 services including programs on the development of 
 living wills.
 (3) Minimum participation rates.--The Secretary shall have 
 the authority to establish minimum employee participation rates 
 as a condition of employer qualification under a qualified 
 worksite health promotion program.
 (4) Guidelines.--The Secretary shall develop guidelines to 
 ensure that employers who sponsor qualified worksite health 
 promotion program do not discriminate among employees as to 
 either eligibility for participation or program benefits.
 (5) Application.--The Secretary shall develop an 
 application form and supporting material to be used by 
 employers to certify that they qualify for one of the worksite 
 health promotion program levels established by the Secretary.

SEC. 1688. WELLNESS DISCOUNT METHODOLOGY.

 (a) Requirement.--The Secretary shall develop a methodology 
consistent with subsection (b) in order to ensure that--
 (1) families entitled to a wellness discount by virtue of 
 employment of a family member by an employer maintaining a 
 qualified worksite health promotion program under section 
 1687(d) receive a credit toward their family share of premium 
 (as defined in section 6101(b)(1)) equal to the wellness 
 discount specified by the plan in which the family elects to 
 enroll; and
 (2) employers maintaining qualified programs receive a 
 rebate annually, based on the average worksite health promotion 
 discount in the health care coverage area, weighted by the 
 enrollment of employees of all employers offering certified 
 wellness programs in the area.
 (b) Methodology.--The methodology developed by the Secretary under 
subsection (a) shall--
 (1) ensure that each family enrolled in a community-rated 
 plan that offers a wellness discount receives the discount 
 provided by the plan chosen by the family regardless of whether 
 the family has enrolled in the plan through a consumer 
 purchasing cooperative directly or through the plan, or through 
 some other means;
 (2) ensure that a separate rebate is computed for each 
 worksite health promotion program level established by the 
 Secretary under section 1687; and
 (3) ensure that any wellness discount offered by health 
 plans are not taken into account in the Board's determination 
 of plan and area compliance with the per-capita premium targets 
 described in subtitle A of title VI of this Act.

 PART 3--SPECIFIC RESPONSIBILITIES OF SECRETARY OF LABOR

SEC. 1691. RESPONSIBILITIES OF SECRETARY OF LABOR.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Labor is responsible--
 (1) under subtitle E, for the enforcement of requirements 
 applicable to community-rated employers (including requirements 
 relating to payment of premiums) and the administration of 
 large group purchasers;
 (2) under subtitle E, with respect to elections by eligible 
 purchasers to become large group purchasers and the termination 
 of such elections;
 (3) for the temporary assumption of the operation of self-
 insured employer sponsored health plans that are insolvent;
 (4) for carrying out any other responsibilities assigned to 
 the Secretary under this Act; and
 (5) for administering title I of the Employee Retirement 
 Income Security Act of 1974 as it relates to group health plans 
 maintained by large group purchasers.
 (b) Agreements with States.--The Secretary of Labor may enter into 
agreements with States in order to enforce responsibilities of 
employers and large group purchasers, and requirements of employer 
sponsored health plans, under subtitle B of title I of the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.
 (c) Consultation with Board.--In carrying out activities under this 
Act with respect to large group purchasers, employer sponsored health 
plans, and employers, the Secretary of Labor shall consult with the 
National Health Board.
 (d) Study on Seasonal Workers.--Not later than 6 months after the 
date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Labor, in consultation 
with the Secretary and such other Federal departments and experts as 
determined appropriate, shall prepare and submit to the appropriate 
committees of Congress, a report concerning the impact of requiring 
employers of seasonal workers to make premium contributions for such 
workers. The report shall analyze and make recommendations concerning 
the fiscal and administrative (including paperwork) burdens on 
employers, employees, and health plans.
 (e) Employer-Related Requirements.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Labor, in consultation 
 with the Secretary, shall be responsible for assuring that 
 employers--
 (A) make payments of any employer premiums (and 
 withhold and make payment of the family share of 
 premiums with respect to qualifying employees) and 
 provide discounts to employees as required under this 
 Act, including auditing of collection activities with 
 respect to such payments,
 (B) submit timely reports as required under this 
 Act, and
 (C) otherwise comply with requirements imposed on 
 employers under this Act.
 (2) Audit and similar authorities.--The Secretary of 
 Labor--
 (A) may carry out such audits (directly or through 
 contract) and such investigations of employers and 
 States, consumer purchasing cooperatives and large 
 group purchasers,
 (B) may exercise such authorities under section 504 
 of Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (in 
 relation to activities under this Act),
 (C) may, with the permission of the Board, provide 
 (through contract or otherwise) for such collection 
 activities (in relation to amounts owed to States, 
 consumer purchasing cooperatives and large group 
 purchasers, and for the benefit of such States, 
 consumer purchasing cooperatives and large group 
 purchasers), and
 (D) may impose such civil penalties under section 
 6210,
 as may be necessary to carry out such Secretary's 
 responsibilities under this section.
 (3) Auditing of employer payments.--
 (A) In general.--Each State is responsible for 
 auditing the records of community-rated employers to 
 assure that employer payments (including the payment of 
 amounts withheld) were made in the appropriate amount 
 as provided under subpart A of part 2 of subtitle B of 
 title VI.
 (B) Employers with employees residing in different 
 community-rating areas.--In the case of a community-
 rated employer which has employees who reside in more 
 than one community-rating area, the Secretary of Labor, 
 in consultation with the Secretary, shall establish a 
 process for the coordination of State auditing 
 activities among the States involved.
 (C) Appeal.--In the case of an audit conducted by a 
 State on an employer under this paragraph, an employer 
 or other State that is aggrieved by the determination 
 in the audit is entitled to review of such audit by the 
 Secretary of Labor in a manner to be provided by such 
 Secretary.
 (f) Authority.--The Secretary of Labor is authorized to issue such 
regulations as may be necessary to carry out section 1704 and 
responsibilities of the Secretary under this Act (including under title 
XI).

SEC. 1692. ASSISTANCE WITH EMPLOYER COLLECTIONS.

 The Secretary of Labor shall provide States with such technical and 
other assistance as may promote the efficient collection of all amounts 
owed under this Act by employers. Such assistance may include the 
assessment of civil monetary penalties, not to exceed $5,000 or three 
times the amount of the liability owed, whichever is greater, in the 
case of repeated failure to pay (as specified in rules of the Secretary 
of Labor).

SEC. 1693. PENALTIES FOR FAILURE OF LARGE EMPLOYERS TO MEET 
 REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) In General.--If the Secretary of Labor finds that a large group 
purchaser has failed substantially to meet the applicable requirements 
of subtitle E, the Secretary shall impose a civil money penalty of not 
to exceed $10,000 for each such violation.
 (b) Excess Increase in Premium Equivalent.--If the Secretary of 
Labor finds that a large group purchaser that is a large employer is in 
violation of the requirements of section 6022 (relating to prohibition 
against excess increase in premium expenditures), the Secretary shall 
require that the purchaser enter into contracts with all carriers 
providing community-rated plans in community-rating areas in which 
their experience-rated individuals reside, under which the purchaser--
 (1) makes payment to the carriers based on an appropriate 
 community rate (determined by the Secretary of Labor based on 
 the final filed per capita premium rate, subject to appropriate 
 risk adjustment and not subject to any employer discount), and
 (2) makes payments to the State of an amount provided under 
 section 6124.

SEC. 1694. APPLICABILITY OF ERISA ENFORCEMENT MECHANISMS FOR 
 ENFORCEMENT OF CERTAIN REQUIREMENTS.

 The provisions of sections 502 (relating to civil enforcement), 504 
(relating to investigative authority) and 506 (relating to criminal 
enforcement) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 
shall apply to enforcement by the Secretary of Labor of the applicable 
requirements for large group purchasers in the same manner and to same 
extent as such provisions apply to enforcement of title I of such Act.

 PART 4--COLLECTIVE BARGAINING DISPUTE RESOLUTION

SEC. 1695. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.

 (a) Finding.--Congress finds that--
 (1) consistent with the intention of this Act to eliminate 
 waste and inefficiency in the health care industry, it is 
 important to avoid costly and disruptive labor disputes; and
 (2) such disputes are particularly likely to take place 
 during the period of transition to a restructured health care 
 delivery system because of disruptions to established 
 employment relationships resulting from that restructuring.
 (b) Purpose.--It is the purpose of this part to expand the role of 
the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, acting through the 
Boards of Inquiry provided for in limited terms under section 8(g) of 
the National Labor Relations Act (29 U.S.C. 158(g)) and section 213 of 
the Labor Management Relations Act of 1947 (29 U.S.C. 183), to avoid 
labor disputes by providing for public fact finding in contract 
negotiations.

SEC. 1696. APPLICATION LIMITED TO TRANSITION PERIOD.

 The provisions of this part are intended to avoid costly and 
disruptive labor disputes during the period of transition to a 
restructured health care delivery system, and shall be repealed 
effective upon the end of calendar year 2000.

SEC. 1697. REQUEST FOR APPOINTMENT OF BOARD OF INQUIRY.

 (a) In General.--A health care entity (as defined in section 
3082(a)) or a labor organization that has been lawfully certified or 
recognized as the representative of the employees of a health care 
entity for the purpose of engaging in collective bargaining concerning 
wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment, may request 
that the Director of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service 
(hereafter referred to in this part as the ``Director'') appoint an 
impartial Health Care Board of Inquiry to investigate the issues 
involved in a collective bargaining dispute between the entity and the 
labor organization.
 (b) Time for Request.--Such request may be made no earlier than 60 
days after notice of the existence of a contract dispute has been 
provided to--
 (1) the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service in 
 accordance with clause (A) or (B) of the last sentence of 
 section 8(d) of the Labor Management Relations Act (29 U.S.C. 
 158(d)); or
 (2) where the health care entity is otherwise exempt from 
 coverage under such Act, any comparable State or territorial 
 agency established to mediate and conciliate disputes to which 
 notice is required to be given under applicable State law.

SEC. 1698. APPOINTMENT OF BOARD OF INQUIRY.

 (a) In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), the Director 
shall appoint a Health Care Board of Inquiry not later than 10 days 
after receipt of a request under section 1696. Each such Board shall be 
composed of such number of individuals as the Director may deem 
desirable. No member appointed under this section shall have any 
interest or involvement in the health care institutions or the employee 
organizations involved in the dispute.
 (b) Limitation.--With respect to the appointment of a Health Care 
Board of Inquiry under paragraph (1), if the Director determines that--
 (1) the health care entity is--
 (A) otherwise exempt from coverage under the Labor 
 Management Relations Act, as amended (29 U.S.C. 141 et 
 seq.); and
 (B) subject to State laws containing procedures for 
 the resolution of impasses in collective bargaining 
 that are comparable to those that would be followed by 
 a Board of Inquiry under this section; or
 (2) the parties involved have agreed to procedures for the 
 resolution of the impasse in collective bargaining that are 
 comparable to those that would be followed by a Board of 
 Inquiry;
the Director may refuse the request for the appointment of such a 
Board.

SEC. 1699. PUBLIC FACTFINDING.

 A Health Care Board of Inquiry appointed under this part shall 
investigate the issues involved in the dispute and make a written 
report thereon to the parties and to the Director within 30 days after 
the establishment of such a Board. The written report shall contain the 
findings of fact together with the Board's recommendations for settling 
the dispute, with the objective of achieving a prompt, peaceful and 
just settlement of the dispute. The Board shall arrange for publication 
of such report within the community served by the health care entity 
involved.

SEC. 1699A. COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS OF BOARDS OF INQUIRY.

 (a) Employees if Federal Government.--Members of any board 
established under this part who are otherwise employed by the Federal 
Government shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for 
travel, subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred by such 
members in carrying out its duties under this section.
 (b) Other Members.--Members of any board established under this 
section who are not subject to subsection (a) shall receive 
compensation at a rate prescribed by the Director but not to exceed the 
daily rate prescribed for GS-128 of the General Schedule under section 
5332 of title 5, United States Code, including travel for each day they 
are engaged in the performance of their duties under this section and 
shall be entitled to reimbursement for travel, subsistence, and other 
necessary expenses incurred by them in carrying out their duties under 
this part.

SEC. 1699B. MAINTENANCE OF STATUS QUO.

 After the establishment of a board under section 1697, and for 15 
days after any such board has issued its report, no change in the 
status quo in effect prior to the expiration of the contract in the 
case of negotiations for a contract renewal, or in effect prior to the 
time the parties began their bargaining in the case of an initial 
beginning negotiation, except by agreement, shall be made by the 
parties to the controversy.

 Subtitle H--Miscellaneous Employer Requirements

SEC. 1701. AUDITING OF RECORDS.

 Each community-rated employer shall maintain such records, and 
provide the State for the area in which the employer maintains the 
principal place of employment (as specified by the Secretary of Labor) 
with access to such records, as may be necessary to verify and audit 
the information reported under this subtitle.

SEC. 1702. PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN EMPLOYER DISCRIMINATION.

 No employer may discriminate with respect to an employee on the 
basis of the family status of the employee or on the basis of the class 
of family enrollment selected with respect to the employee.

SEC. 1703. EVASION OF OBLIGATIONS.

 It shall be unlawful for any employer or other person to discharge, 
fine, suspend, expel, discipline, discriminate or otherwise take 
adverse action against any employee if a purpose of such action is to 
interfere with the employee's attainment of status as a qualifying 
employee, as a full time employee, or as a part-time employee, or if a 
purpose of such action is to evade or avoid any obligation under this 
Act.

SEC. 1704. PROHIBITION ON SELF-FUNDING OF COST SHARING BENEFITS.

 (a) Prohibition.--A community-rated employer (and an experience-
rated employer with respect to employees who are community rate 
eligible individuals) may provide benefits to employees that consist of 
the benefits included in a cost sharing policy (as defined in section 
1507(c)) only through a contribution toward the purchase of a cost 
sharing policy which is funded primarily through insurance.
 (b) Individual and Employer Responsibilities.--In the case of an 
individual who resides in a single-payer State and an employer with 
respect to employees who reside in such a State, the responsibilities 
of such individual and employer under such system shall supersede the 
obligations of the individual and employer under this subtitle.

SEC. 1705. EMPLOYER RETIREE OBLIGATION.

 (a) In General.--If an employer was providing, as of October 1, 
1993, a threshold payment (specified in subsection (c)) for a person 
who was a qualifying retired beneficiary (as defined in subsection (b)) 
as of such date, the employer shall pay, to or on behalf of that 
beneficiary for each month beginning with January 1998, an amount that 
is not less than the amount specified in subsection (d), but only if 
and for so long as the person remains a qualifying retired beneficiary.
 (b) Qualifying Retired Beneficiary.--In this section, the term 
``qualifying retired beneficiary'' means a person who is an eligible 
retiree or qualified spouse or child (as such terms are defined in 
subsections (b) and (c) of section 6114).
 (c) Threshold Payment.--The term ``threshold payment'' means, for 
an employer with respect to a health benefit plan providing coverage to 
a qualifying retired beneficiary, a payment--
 (1) for coverage of any item or service described in 
 section 1101, and
 (2) the amount of which is at least 20 percent of the 
 amount of the premium (or premium equivalent) for such coverage 
 with respect to the beneficiary (and dependents).
 (d) Amount.--The amount specified in this subsection is 20 percent 
of the weighted average premium for the health care coverage area in 
which the beneficiary resides and for the applicable class of family 
enrollment.
 (e) Nature of Obligation.--The requirement of this section shall be 
in addition to any other requirement imposed on an employer under this 
Act or otherwise.
 (f) Protection of Collective Bargaining Rights.--Nothing in this 
Act (including this section) shall be construed as affecting collective 
bargaining rights or rights under collective bargaining agreements.

SEC. 1706. RULES GOVERNING LITIGATION INVOLVING RETIREE HEALTH 
 BENEFITS.

 (a) Maintenance of Benefits.--
 (1) In general.--If--
 (A) retiree health benefits or plan or plan sponsor 
 payments in connection with such benefits are to be or 
 have been terminated or reduced under an employee 
 welfare benefit plan; and
 (B) an action is brought by any participant or 
 beneficiary to enjoin or otherwise modify such 
 termination or reduction,
 the court without requirement of any additional showing shall 
 promptly order the plan and plan sponsor to maintain the 
 retiree health benefits and payments at the level in effect 
 immediately before the termination or reduction while the 
 action is pending in any court. No security or other 
 undertaking shall be required of any participant or beneficiary 
 as a condition for issuance of such relief. An order requiring 
 such maintenance of benefits may be refused or dissolved only 
 upon determination by the court, on the basis of clear and 
 convincing evidence, that the action is clearly without merit.
 (2) Modifications.--Nothing in this section shall preclude 
 a court from modifying the obligation of a plan or plan sponsor 
 to the extent retiree benefits are otherwise being paid under 
 section 6208.
 (b) Burden of Proof.--In addition to the relief authorized in 
subsection (a) or otherwise available, if, in any action described in 
subsection (a), the terms of the employee welfare benefit plan summary 
plan description or other materials distributed to employees at the 
time of a participant's retirement or disability are silent or are 
ambiguous, either on their face or after consideration of extrinsic 
evidence, as to whether retiree health benefits and payments may be 
terminated or reduced for a participant and his or her beneficiaries 
after the participant's retirement or disability, then the benefits and 
payments shall not be terminated or reduced for the participant and his 
or her beneficiaries unless the plan or plan sponsor establishes by a 
preponderance of the evidence that the summary plan description and 
other materials about retiree benefits--
 (1) were distributed to the participant at least 90 days in 
 advance of retirement or disability;
 (2) did not promise retiree health benefits for the 
 lifetime of the participant and his or her spouse; and
 (3) clearly and specifically disclosed that the plan 
 allowed such termination or reduction as to the participant 
 after the time of his or her retirement or disability.
The disclosure described in paragraph (3) must have been made 
prominently and in language which can be understood by the average plan 
participant.
 (c) Representation.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an 
employee representative of any retired employee or the employee's 
spouse or dependents may--
 (1) bring an action described in this section on behalf of 
 such employee, spouse, or dependents; or
 (2) appear in such an action on behalf of such employee, 
 spouse or dependents.
 (d) Retiree Health Benefits.--For the purposes of this section, the 
term ``retiree health benefits'' means health benefits (including 
coverage) which are provided to--
 (1) retired or disabled employees who, immediately before 
 the termination or reduction, are entitled to receive such 
 benefits upon retirement or becoming disabled; and
 (2) their spouses and dependents.
 (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to actions relating to terminations or reductions of retiree 
health benefits which are pending or brought, on or after July 20, 
1993.

SEC. 1707. PARTICIPATION IN FEHBP.

 (a) In General.--A qualifying employee of an American employer (as 
defined in section 3121(h) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) who is 
employed by such an employer outside the United States may elect to 
purchase coverage through designated health plans participating in 
FEHBP.
 (b) Voluntary Participation.--Participation by an employee 
described in subsection (a) shall be at the discretion of such 
employee, and employer payments on behalf of such employee shall be 
voluntary.
 (c) Regulations.--The National Health Board, in consultation with 
the Office of Personnel Management, shall issue regulations governing 
the provision and reimbursement of items and services included in the 
comprehensive benefit package, premium payments by employers and 
employees, and the establishment of separate risk pools for Federal and 
non-Federal employees abroad.

SEC. 1708. ENFORCEMENT.

 In the case of a person that violates a requirement of this 
subtitle, the Secretary of Labor may impose a civil money penalty, in 
an amount not to exceed $10,000, for each violation with respect to 
each individual.

 Subtitle I--General Definitions; Miscellaneous Provisions

 PART 1--GENERAL DEFINITIONS

SEC. 1901. DEFINITIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYMENT AND INCOME.

 (a) In General.--Except as otherwise specifically provided, in this 
Act the following definitions and rules apply:
 (1) Employer, employee, employment, and wages defined.--
 Except as provided in this section--
 (A) the terms ``wages'' and ``employment'' have the 
 meanings given such terms under section 3121 of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
 (B) the term ``employee'' has the meaning given 
 such term under section 3121 of such Code, subject to 
 the provisions of chapter 25 of such Code, and
 (C) the term ``employer'' has the same meaning as 
 the term ``employer'' as used in such section 3121.
 (2) Exceptions.--For purposes of paragraph (1)--
 (A) Employment.--
 (i) Employment included.--Paragraphs (1), 
 (2), (5), (7) (other than clauses (i) through 
 (iv) of subparagraph (C) and clauses (i) 
 through (v) of subparagraph (F)), (8), (9), 
 (10), (11), (13), (15), (18), and (19) of 
 section 3121(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
 1986 shall not apply.
 (ii) Exclusion of inmates as employees.--
 Employment shall not include services performed 
 in a penal institution by an inmate thereof or 
 in a hospital or other health care institution 
 by a patient thereof.
 (B) Wages.--
 (i) In general.--Paragraph (1) of section 
 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
 shall not apply.
 (ii) Tips not included.--The term ``wages'' 
 does not include cash tips.
 (C) Exclusion of certain foreign employment.--The 
 term ``employee'' does not include an individual with 
 respect to service, if the individual is not a citizen 
 or resident of the United States and the service is 
 performed outside the United States.
 (3) Aggregation rules for employers.--For purposes of this 
 Act--
 (A) all employers treated as a single employer 
 under subsection (a) or (b) of section 52 of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall be treated as a 
 single employer, and
 (B) under regulations of the Secretary of Labor, 
 all employees of organizations which are under common 
 control with one or more organizations which are exempt 
 from income tax under subtitle A of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 shall be treated as employed by a 
 single employer.
 The regulations prescribed under subparagraph (B) shall be 
 based on principles similar to the principles which apply to 
 taxable organizations under subparagraph (A).
 (4) Employer premium.--The term ``employer premium'' refers 
 to the premium established and imposed under part 2 of subtitle 
 B of title VI.
 (b) Qualifying Employee; Full-Time Employment.--
 (1) Qualifying employee.--
 (A) In general.--In this Act, the term ``qualifying 
 employee'' means, with respect to an employer for a 
 month, an employee (other than a covered child, as 
 defined in subparagraph (C)) who is employed by the 
 employer for at least 40 hours (as determined under 
 paragraph (3)) in the month, subject to the limitation 
 set forth in subparagraph (D).
 (B) No special treatment of medicare beneficiaries, 
 ssi recipients, afdc recipients, and others.--
 Subparagraph (A) shall apply regardless of whether or 
 not the employee is a medicare-eligible individual, an 
 SSI recipient, an AFDC recipient, an individual 
 described in section 1004(b), an eligible individual or 
 is authorized to be so employed.
 (C) Covered child defined.--In subparagraph (A), 
 the term ``covered child'' means an eligible individual 
 who is a child and is enrolled under a health plan as a 
 family member described in section 1011(b)(2)(B).
 (D) Qualifying employees.--As used in this Act--
 (i) the term qualifying employee shall not 
 include, with respect to an employer for a 
 month, an employee of a nonelecting small 
 employer (as defined in section 6220);
 (ii) the term ``nonqualifying employee'' 
 means, with respect to an employer for a month, 
 an employee (who otherwise would be a 
 qualifying employee) of a nonelecting small 
 employer;
 (iii) the term ``qualifying employee'' 
 shall not include, with respect to an employer 
 for a month, a part-time employee during the 
 first month (four-week period) of such 
 employee's employment; and
 (iv) the term ``qualifying employee'' shall 
 include, with respect to an employer for a 
 month, a part-time employee beginning with the 
 second month of such employee's employment.
 (2) Full-time equivalent employees; part-time employees.--
 (A) In general.--For purposes of this Act, a 
 qualifying employee who is employed by an employer--
 (i) for at least 120 hours in a month, is 
 counted as 1 full-time equivalent employee for 
 the month and shall be deemed to be employed on 
 a full-time basis, or
 (ii) for at least 40 hours, but less than 
 120 hours, in a month, is counted as a fraction 
 of a full-time equivalent employee in the month 
 equal to the full-time employment ratio (as 
 defined in subparagraph (B)) for the employee 
 and shall be deemed to be employed on a part-
 time basis.
 (B) Full-time employment ratio defined.--For 
 purposes of this Act, the term ``full-time employment 
 ratio'' means, with respect to a qualifying employee of 
 an employer in a month, the lesser of 1 or the ratio 
 of--
 (i) the number of hours of employment such 
 employee is employed by such employer for the 
 month (as determined under paragraph (3)), to
 (ii) 120 hours.
 (C) Full-time employee.--For purposes of this Act, 
 the term ``full-time employee'' means, with respect to 
 an employer, an employee who is employed on a full-time 
 basis (as specified in subparagraph (A)) by the 
 employer.
 (D) Part-time employee.--For purposes of this Act, 
 the term ``part-time employee'' means, with respect to 
 an employer, an employee who is employed on a part-time 
 basis (as specified in subparagraph (A)) by the 
 employer.
 (E) Consideration of industry practice.--As 
 provided under rules established by the Board, an 
 employee who is not described in subparagraph (C) or 
 (D) shall be considered to be employed on a full-time 
 or part-time basis by an employer (and to be a full-
 time or part-time employee of an employer) for a month 
 (or for all months in a 12-month period) if the 
 employee is employed by that employer on a continuing 
 basis that, taking into account the structure or nature 
 of employment in the industry, represents full or part-
 time employment in that industry.
 (F) Institutions of higher education.--
 Notwithstanding any other provision in this section--
 (i)(I) employees of an Institution of 
 higher education (as defined in section 1201(a) 
 of the Higher Education Act of 1965), or of an 
 elementary or secondary school (as defined in 
 section 1471 of the Elementary and Secondary 
 Education Act of 1965), who are exempt under 
 section 13 of the Fair Labor Standards Act, 
 shall be deemed to be full-time employees if 
 they work the hours that constitute full-time 
 employment as defined at such institution;
 (II) part-time employment shall be 
 considered proportional to such hours for full-
 time employees; and
 (III) part-time employees who work at least 
 one-third of the hours that constitute full-
 time employment as defined at such institution 
 shall be eligible for proportional employer 
 premium contributions; and
 (ii) regular employees of institutions of 
 higher education or elementary and secondary 
 schools who are not paid during the summer 
 months or other periods of the year, but are 
 assured employment at the end of such periods, 
 shall be eligible for year-round employer 
 premium contributions if such individuals are 
 not eligible to collect unemployment 
 compensation for the periods for which they 
 would receive health care premium contributions 
 from the employer covered by this subsection.
 (3) Hours of employment.--
 (A) In general.--For purposes of this Act, the 
 Board shall specify the method for computing hours of 
 employment for employees of an employer consistent with 
 this paragraph. The Board shall take into account rules 
 used for purposes of applying the Fair Labor Standards 
 Act.
 (B) Hourly wage earners.--In the case of an 
 individual who receives compensation (in the form of 
 hourly wages or compensation) for the performance of 
 services, the individual is considered to be 
 ``employed'' by an employer for an hour if compensation 
 is payable with respect to that hour of employment, 
 without regard to whether or not the employee is 
 actually performing services during such hours.
 (4) Treatment of salaried employees and employees paid on 
 contingent or bonus arrangements.--In the case of an employee 
 who receives compensation on a salaried basis or on the basis 
 of a commission (or other contingent or bonus basis), rather 
 than an hourly wage, the Board shall establish rules for the 
 conversion of the compensation to hours of employment, taking 
 into account the minimum monthly compensation levels for 
 workers employed on a full-time basis under the Fair Labor 
 Standards Act and other factors the Board considers relevant.
 (c) Definitions Relating to Self-Employment.--In this Act:
 (1) Net earnings from self-employment.--The term ``net 
 earnings from self-employment'' has the meaning given such term 
 under section 1402(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (2) Self-employed individual.--The term ``self-employed 
 individual'' means, for a year, an individual who has net 
 earnings from self-employment for the year.

SEC. 1902. OTHER GENERAL DEFINITIONS.

 Except as otherwise specifically provided, in this Act the 
following definitions apply:
 (1) AFDC family.--The term ``AFDC family'' means a family 
 composed entirely of one or more AFDC recipients.
 (2) AFDC recipient.--The term ``AFDC recipient'' means, for 
 a month, an individual who is receiving aid or assistance under 
 any plan of the State approved under title I, X, XIV, or XVI, 
 or part A or part E of title IV, of the Social Security Act for 
 the month.
 (3) Applicable health plan.--The term ``applicable health 
 plan'' means, with respect to an eligible individual, the 
 health plan specified pursuant to section 1004 and part 2 of 
 subtitle A.
 (4) Carrier.--The term ``carrier'' means a licensed 
 insurance company, a hospital or medical service corporation 
 (including an existing Blue Cross or Blue Shield organization, 
 within the meaning of section 833(c)(2) of Internal Revenue 
 Code of 1986), a health maintenance organization, or other 
 entity licensed or certified by the State to provide health 
 insurance or health benefits. The Board may issue regulations 
 that provide for affiliated carriers to be treated as a single 
 carrier where appropriate under this Act.
 (5) Case management.--The term ``case management'' means 
 services that assist individuals in gaining access to needed 
 medical, social, educational, and other services.
 (6) Citizen of another country legally residing in the 
 united states.--The term ``citizen of another country legally 
 residing in the United States'' means any of the following:
 (A) An alien lawfully admitted for permanent 
 residence (within the meaning of section 101(a)(20) of 
 the Immigration and Nationality Act).
 (B) An alien granted work authorization by the 
 Immigration and Naturalization Service.
 (C) An alien permanently residing in the United 
 States under color of law, including (but not limited 
 to) any of the following:
 (i) An alien who is admitted as a refugee 
 under section 207 of the Immigration and 
 Nationality Act.
 (ii) An alien who is granted asylum under 
 section 208 of such Act.
 (iii) An alien whose deportation is 
 withheld under section 243(h) of such Act.
 (iv) An alien who is admitted for temporary 
 residence under section 210, 210A, or 245A of 
 such Act.
 (v) An alien who has been paroled into the 
 United States under section 212(d)(5) of such 
 Act for an indefinite period or who has been 
 granted extended voluntary departure, temporary 
 protected status, or deferred enforced 
 departure.
 (vi) An alien who is the spouse or 
 unmarried child under 21 years of age of a 
 citizen of the United States, or the parent of 
 such a citizen if the citizen is over 21 years 
 of age, and with respect to whom an application 
 for adjustment to lawful permanent residence is 
 pending.
 (vii) An alien within such other 
 classification of aliens permanently residing 
 under color of law for purposes of this Act 
 only as the National Health Board may establish 
 by regulation. Such regulation shall include 
 categories of such aliens who are included in 
 regulations as in effect on the date of the 
 enactment of this Act under title XIX of the 
 Social Security Act and other categories within 
 a public health priority.
 (7) Combination cost sharing plan.--The term ``combination 
 cost sharing plan'' means a health plan that provides 
 combination cost sharing schedule (consistent with section 
 1134).
 (8) Community-rated employer.--The term ``community-rated 
 employer'' means, with respect to an employee, an employer that 
 is not an experience-rated employer with respect to such 
 employee.
 (9) Community-rated plan.--The term ``community-rated 
 plan'' means a health plan certified by a State under section 
 1503 that is provided to community-rated individuals.
 (10) Community rate eligible individual.--The term 
 ``community rate eligible individual'' means an eligible 
 individual with respect to whom a community-rated plan is an 
 applicable health plan.
 (11) Comprehensive benefit package.--The term 
 ``comprehensive benefit package'' means the package of health 
 benefits provided under subtitle B.
 (12) Consumer price index; cpi.--The terms ``consumer price 
 index'' and ``CPI'' mean the Consumer Price Index for all urban 
 consumers (U.S. city average), as published by the Bureau of 
 Labor Statistics.
 (13) Cost sharing policy.--The term ``cost sharing policy'' 
 means a health insurance policy or health benefit plan offered 
 to an community rate eligible individual which provides 
 coverage for deductibles, coinsurance, and copayments imposed 
 as part of the comprehensive benefit package under subtitle B, 
 whether imposed under a higher cost sharing plan or with 
 respect to out-of-network providers.
 (14) Covered wages defined.--In this section, the term 
 ``covered wages'' means wages paid an employee of an employer 
 during a month in which the employee was a qualifying employee 
 of the employer.
 (15) Diagnosable mental disorder and diagnosable substance 
 abuse disorder.--The terms ``diagnosable mental disorder'' and 
 ``diagnosable substance abuse disorder'' mean a disorder that--
 (A) is listed in the Diagnostic and Statistical 
 Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Revised or 
 a revised version of such manual (except V Codes for 
 Conditions Not Attributable to a Mental Disorder That 
 Are a Focus of Attention or Treatment);
 (B) is the equivalent of a disorder described in 
 subparagraph (A), but is listed in the International 
 Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision, Clinical 
 Modification, Third Edition or a revised version of 
 such text; or
 (C) is listed in any authoritative text specifying 
 diagnostic criteria for mental disorders or substance 
 abuse disorders that is identified by the National 
 Health Board.
 (16) Disabled ssi recipient.--The term ``disabled SSI 
 recipient'' means an individual who--
 (A) is an SSI recipient, and
 (B) has been determined to be disabled for purposes 
 of the supplemental security income program (under 
 title XVI of the Social Security Act).
 (17) Essential community provider.--The term ``essential 
 community provider'' means an entity certified as such a 
 provider under subpart B of part 2 of subtitle F.
 (18) Experience-rated employer.--The term ``experience-
 rated employer'' means--
 (A) a large employer that is a large group 
 purchaser, and
 (B) another employer that participates in a 
 experience-rated plan sponsored by a large group 
 purchaser described in paragraph (6) or (7) of section 
 1401.
 (19) Exempt individual.--The term ``exempt individual'' 
 means an individual that has been granted an exemption from 
 paying Social Security Taxes under section 1402(g) of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986, or an individual who would be 
 eligible for an exemption under such section if the individual 
 were self-employed.
 (20) Experience-rated individual.--The term ``experience-
 rated individual'' means, with respect to a large group 
 purchaser, an eligible individual with respect to whom an 
 experience-rated plan sponsored by the purchaser is the 
 applicable health plan.
 (21) Experience-rated plan.--The term ``experience-rated 
 plan'' means either--
 (A) an employer sponsored health plan (as defined 
 in section 1401(e)(5)) offered by a large group 
 purchaser, or
 (B) an insured health plan offered by a carrier to 
 a large group purchaser.
 (22) Fee-for-service plan.--The term ``fee-for-service 
 plan'' means a health plan described in section 1211(b)(2)(A).
 (23) First year.--The term ``first year'' means, with 
 respect to--
 (A) a State that is a participating State in a year 
 before 1998, the year in which the State first is a 
 participating State, or
 (B) any other State, 1998.
 (24) Health care coverage area.--The term ``health care 
 coverage area'' means an area specified by a State under 
 section 1202.
 (25) Health plan sponsor.--The term ``health plan sponsor'' 
 means--
 (A) with respect to a community-rated plan, the 
 carrier providing the plan,
 (B) with respect to an insured experience-rated 
 plan, the carrier providing the plan, and
 (C) with respect to a self-funded experience-rated 
 plan, the large group purchaser providing the plan.
 (26) Higher cost sharing plan.--The term ``higher cost 
 sharing plan'' means a health plan that provides a higher cost 
 sharing schedule (consistent with section 1133).
 (27) Hospital.--The term ``hospital'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 1861(e) of the Social Security Act, except 
 that such term shall include--
 (A) in the case of an item or service provided to 
 an individual whose applicable health plan is specified 
 pursuant to section 1005(b)(1), a facility of the 
 uniformed services under title 10, United States Code, 
 that is primarily engaged in providing services to 
 inpatients that are equivalent to the services provided 
 by a hospital defined in such section 1861(e);
 (B) in the case of an item or service provided to 
 an individual whose applicable health plan is specified 
 pursuant to section 1005(b)(2), a facility operated by 
 the Department of Veterans Affairs that is primarily 
 engaged in providing services to inpatients that are 
 equivalent to the services provided by a hospital 
 defined in such section 1861(e); and
 (C) in the case of an item or service provided to 
 an individual whose applicable health plan is specified 
 pursuant to section 1005(b)(3), a facility operated by 
 the Indian Health Service that is primarily engaged in 
 providing services to inpatients that are equivalent to 
 the services provided by a hospital defined in such 
 section 1861(e).
 (28) Inpatient hospital services.--The term ``inpatient 
 hospital services'' means items and services described in 
 paragraphs (1) through (3) of section 1861(b) of the Social 
 Security Act when provided to an inpatient of a hospital. The 
 National Health Board shall specify those health professional 
 services described in section 1103 that shall be treated as 
 inpatient hospital services when provided to an inpatient of a 
 hospital.
 (29) Long-term nonimmigrant.--The term ``long-term 
 nonimmigrant'' means a nonimmigrant described in subparagraph 
 (E), (H), (I), (J), (K), (L), (M), (N), (O), (Q), or (R) of 
 section 101(a)(15) of the Immigration and Nationality Act or an 
 alien within such other classification of nonimmigrant as the 
 National Health Board may establish by regulation.
 (30) Lower cost sharing plan.--The term ``lower cost 
 sharing plan'' means a health plan that provides a lower cost 
 sharing schedule (consistent with section 1132).
 (31) Medicare program.--The term ``medicare program'' means 
 the health insurance program under title XVIII of the Social 
 Security Act.
 (32) Medicare-eligible individual.--The term ``medicare-
 eligible individual'' means, subject to section 1012(a), an 
 individual who is entitled to benefits under part A of the 
 medicare program.
 (33) Medications management.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``medications 
 management'' refers to the prescription, use, 
 monitoring, and review of medication for treatment of a 
 mental disorder or pharmacotherapy for the treatment of 
 a substance abuse disorder, including no more than 
 minimal medical psychotherapy or counseling.
 (B) Visit.--For purposes of medications management, 
 the term ``visit'' means one week of treatment.
 (34) Move.--The term ``move'' means, respect to an 
 individual, a change of residence of the individual from one 
 health care coverage area to another health care coverage area.
 (35) National health board; board.--The terms ``National 
 Health Board'' and ``Board'' mean the National Health Board 
 created under section 1601.
 (36) Non-qualifying employee.--The term ``non-qualifying 
 employee'' means, with respect to an employer for a month, an 
 employee (who otherwise would be a qualifying employee) of a 
 nonelecting small employer.
 (37) Participating provider.--The term ``participating 
 provider'' means, with respect to a health plan, a provider of 
 health care services who is a member of a provider network of 
 the plan.
 (38) Placed for adoption.--The term ``placed for adoption'' 
 in connection with any placement for adoption of a child with 
 any person, means the assumption and retention by such person 
 of a legal obligation for total or partial support of such 
 child in anticipation of the adoption of such child.
 (39) Poverty level.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``applicable poverty 
 level'' means, for a family for a year, the official 
 poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management 
 and Budget, and revised annually in accordance with 
 section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act 
 of 1981) applicable to a family of the size involved 
 (as determined under subparagraph (B)) for 1994 
 adjusted by the percentage increase or decrease 
 described in subparagraph (C) for the year involved.
 (B) Family size.--In applying the applicable 
 poverty level to--
 (i) an individual enrollment, the family 
 size is deemed to be one person;
 (ii) a couple-only enrollment, the family 
 size is deemed to be two persons;
 (iii) a single parent enrollment, the 
 family size is deemed to be three persons; or
 (iv) a dual parent enrollment, the family 
 size is deemed to be four persons.
 (C) Percentage adjustment.--The percentage increase 
 or decrease described in this subparagraph for a year 
 is the percentage increase or decrease by which the 
 average CPI for the 12-month-period ending with August 
 31 of the preceding year exceeds such average for the 
 12-month period ending with August 31, 1993.
 (D) Rounding.--Any adjustment made under 
 subparagraph (A) for a year shall be rounded to the 
 nearest multiple of $100.
 (40) Prisoner.--The term ``prisoner'' means, as specified 
 by the Board, an eligible individual during a period of 
 imprisonment under Federal, State, or local authority after 
 conviction as an adult.
 (41) Psychiatric hospital.--The term ``psychiatric 
 hospital'' has the meaning given such term in section 1861(f) 
 of the Social Security Act, except that such term shall 
 include--
 (A) in the case of an item or service provided to 
 an individual whose applicable health plan is specified 
 pursuant to section 1005(b)(1), a facility of the 
 uniformed services under title 10, United States Code, 
 that is engaged in providing services to inpatients 
 that are equivalent to the services provided by a 
 psychiatric hospital;
 (B) in the case of an item or service provided to 
 an individual whose applicable health plan is specified 
 pursuant to section 1005(b)(2), a facility operated by 
 the Department of Veterans Affairs that is engaged in 
 providing services to inpatients that are equivalent to 
 the services provided by a psychiatric hospital; and
 (C) in the case of an item or service provided to 
 an individual whose applicable health plan is specified 
 pursuant to section 1005(b)(3), a facility operated by 
 the Indian Health Service that is engaged in providing 
 services to inpatients that are equivalent to the 
 services provided by a psychiatric hospital.
 (42) Rehabilitation facility.--The term ``rehabilitation 
 facility'' means an institution (or a distinct part of an 
 institution) which is established and operated for the purpose 
 of providing diagnostic, therapeutic, and rehabilitation 
 services to individuals for rehabilitation from illness, 
 injury, disorder or other health condition. An entity 
 qualifying as a hospital for purposes of section 1102 may also 
 qualify as a rehabilitation facility for purposes of section 
 1110.
 (43) Reside.--
 (A) An individual is considered to reside in the 
 location in which the individual maintains a primary 
 residence (as established under rules of the National 
 Health Board).
 (B) Under such rules and subject to section 1516, 
 in the case of an individual who maintains more than 
 one residence, the primary residence of the individual 
 shall be determined taking into account the proportion 
 of time spent at each residence.
 (C) In the case of a couple only one spouse of 
 which is a qualifying employee, except as the Board may 
 provide, the residence of the employee shall be the 
 residence of the couple.
 (44) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.
 (45) Self-funded plan.--The term ``self-funded plan'' means 
 (as defined in regulations of the Secretary of Labor) a health 
 plan provided by a large group purchaser and which is not 
 provided by or through a carrier.
 (46) Sexual orientation.--The term ``sexual orientation'' 
 means homosexual, bisexual, or heterosexual orientation, real 
 or perceived, as manifested by identity, acts, statements, or 
 associations.
 (47) Skilled nursing facility.--The term ``skilled nursing 
 facility'' means an institution (or a distinct part of an 
 institution) which is primarily engaged in providing to 
 residents--
 (A) skilled nursing care and related services for 
 residents who require medical or nursing care; or
 (B) rehabilitation services to residents for 
 rehabilitation from illness, injury, disorder or other 
 health condition.
 (48) SSI family.--The term ``SSI family'' means a family 
 composed entirely of one or more SSI recipients.
 (49) SSI recipient.--The term ``SSI recipient'' means, for 
 a month, an individual--
 (A) with respect to whom supplemental security 
 income benefits are being paid under title XVI of the 
 Social Security Act for the month,
 (B) who is receiving a supplementary payment under 
 section 1616 of such Act or under section 212 of Public 
 Law 93-66 for the month, or
 (C) who is receiving monthly benefits under section 
 1619(a) of the Social Security Act (whether or not 
 pursuant to section 1616(c)(3) of such Act) for the 
 month.
 (50) State.--The term ``State'' includes the District of 
 Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American 
 Samoa, and the Northern Mariana Islands.
 (51) State medicaid plan.--The term ``State medicaid plan'' 
 means a plan of medical assistance of a State approved under 
 title XIX of the Social Security Act.
 (52) Supplemental health benefit policy.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``supplemental health 
 benefit policy'' means a health insurance policy or 
 health benefit plan offered to a community rate 
 eligible individual which provides--
 (i) coverage for services and items not 
 included in the comprehensive benefit package, 
 or
 (ii) coverage for items and services 
 included in such package but not covered 
 because of a limitation in amount, duration, or 
 scope provided under this title,
 or both.
 (B) Exclusions.--Such term does not include the 
 following:
 (i) A cost sharing policy.
 (ii) A long-term care insurance policy.
 (iii) Insurance that limits benefits with 
 respect to specific diseases (or conditions).
 (iv) Hospital or nursing home indemnity 
 insurance.
 (v) A medicare supplemental policy (as 
 defined in section 1882(g) of the Social 
 Security Act).
 (vi) Insurance with respect to accidents.
 (53) United States.--The term ``United States'' means the 
 50 States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin 
 Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and Northern Mariana Islands.

SEC. 1903. REFERENCE TO CERTAIN TERMS.

 In any provision in this Act (other than this I, subtitle J of 
title III, title VI, and subtitle E of title VIII), including any 
amendment made by such a provision of this Act--
 (1) any reference to a ``corporate alliance employer'' is 
 deemed a reference to an ``experience-rated employer'';
 (2) any reference to a ``corporate alliance'' is deemed a 
 reference either to an ``experience-rated employer'' or a 
 ``large group purchaser'', as specified by the Board;
 (3) any reference to a ``corporate alliance eligible 
 individual'' is deemed a reference to an ``experience-rated 
 individual'';
 (4) any reference to a ``regional alliance'' is deemed a 
 reference either to a contracting entity, a State, or a 
 consumer purchasing cooperative, as specified by the Board;
 (5) any reference to an ``alliance area'' is deemed a 
 reference to a ``community-rating area'';
 (6) any reference to a ``regional alliance eligible 
 individual'' is deemed a reference to a ``community-rated 
 individual'';
 (7) any reference to an ``alliance eligible individual'' is 
 deemed a reference to a ``community-rated individual'' and to 
 an ``experience rated individual'';
 (8) any reference to a ``regional alliance health plan'' is 
 deemed a reference to a ``community-rated plan'';
 (9) any reference to a ``corporate alliance health plan'' 
 is deemed a reference to an ``experience-rated plan''; and
 (10) any reference to a ``health plan'' is deemed a 
 reference either to a health plan or a carrier, as specified by 
 the Board.

 PART 2--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

SEC. 1911. USE OF INTERIM, FINAL REGULATIONS.

 In order to permit the timely implementation of the provisions of 
this Act, the National Health Board, the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services, the Secretary of Labor are each authorized to issue 
regulations under this Act on an interim basis that become final on the 
date of publication, subject to change based on subsequent public 
comment.

SEC. 1912. NEUTRALITY CONCERNING UNION ORGANIZING.

 Amounts appropriated to carry out this Act may not be utilized to 
assist, promote or deter union organizing.

SEC. 1913. SOCIAL SECURITY ACT REFERENCES.

 Except as may otherwise be provided, any reference in this title, 
or in title V or VI, to a provision of the Social Security Act shall be 
to that provision of the Social Security Act as in effect on the date 
of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 1914. ANTIDISCRIMINATION.

 (a) In General.--Neither the National Health Board nor any State, 
health plan, consumer purchasing cooperative, large group purchaser, 
employer, or other entity subject to this Act shall directly or through 
contractual arrangements--
 (1) deny or limit access to or the availability of health 
 care services, or otherwise discriminate in connection with the 
 provision of health care services; or
 (2) limit, segregate or classify an individual in any way 
 which would deprive or tend to deprive such individual of 
 health care services, or otherwise adversely affect his or her 
 access to health care services;
on the basis of race, national origin, sex, religion, language, income, 
age, sexual orientation, disability, health status, or anticipated need 
for health services.
 (b) Definition.--As used in this section, the term ``in connection 
with the provision of health care services'' includes, but is not 
limited to--
 (1) establishing the boundaries for health care coverage 
 areas under section 1202 and for premium areas, enrolling 
 persons in a health care plan or marketing a health care plan, 
 and selecting providers or setting the terms or conditions 
 under which providers participate in a health care plan or 
 provider network; and
 (2) determining the scope of services provided by a health 
 care plan, and providing such services and determining the site 
 or location of health care facilities.
 (c) Regulations.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment 
of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall issue 
regulations to carry out this section.
 (d) Effect on Other Laws. Nothing in this Act shall be construed to 
limit the scope of, or the availability of relief under, any other 
Federal or State law prohibiting discrimination or providing relief 
therefore.
 (e) Benefits.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to require or 
prohibit the provision of benefits to an employee for the benefit of 
his or her same-sex partner.
 (f) Outreach Unaffected.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed to prevent a person from engaging in activities to encourage 
the enrollment of community rated individuals residing in underserved 
areas.

SEC. 1915. COVERAGE OF BENEFITS UNDER HEALTH SECURITY ACT.

 (a) Davis-Bacon Act.--Subsection (b)(2) of the first section of the 
Davis Bacon Act (40 U.S.C. 276a(b)(2)) is amended in the matter 
following subparagraph (B) by inserting after ``local law'' the 
following: ``(other than benefits provided pursuant to the Health 
Security Act)''.
 (b) Service Contract Act of 1965.--The second sentence of section 
2(a)(2) of the Service Contract Act of 1965 (41 U.S.C. 351(a)(2)) is 
amended by inserting after ``local law'' the following: ``(other than 
benefits provided pursuant to the Health Security Act)''.

SEC. 1916. GOVERNMENT REQUIRED DATA.

 The set of data referred to in section 5114(a)(5) shall include 
data on--
 (1) enrollment and disenrollment in health plans;
 (2) clinical encounters and other items and services 
 provided by health care providers;
 (3) administrative, operational and financial aspects 
 regarding composition, transactions and activities of 
 participating States, health plans, health care providers, 
 employers and individuals that are necessary to determine 
 compliance with this Act or an Act amended by this Act;
 (4) terms of agreement between health plans and the health 
 care providers who are members of provider networks of the 
 plans;
 (5) payment of benefits in cases in which benefits may be 
 payable under a health plan and any other insurance policy or 
 health program;
 (6) utilization management by health plans and health care 
 providers;
 (7) the information collected and reported by the Board or 
 disseminated by other individuals or entities as part of the 
 National Quality Management Program under subtitle A;
 (8) health care and payment grievances and the resolutions 
 of such grievances; and
 (9) any other fact that may be necessary to determine 
 whether a health plan or a health care provider has complied 
 with a Federal statute pertaining to fraud or misrepresentation 
 in the provision or purchasing of health care or in the 
 submission of a claim for benefits or payment under a health 
 plan.

SEC. 1917. SENSE OF THE COMMITTEE CONCERNING FUNDING SOURCES.

 (a) Financing.--It is the sense of the Committee on Labor and Human 
Resources of the Senate that when the Health Security Act is enacted it 
should include the following sources of financing not within the 
jurisdiction of the Committee:
 (1) The net savings and revenues included in S.1757, the 
 Health Security Act which are outside the jurisdiction of the 
 Committee.
 (2) The extension to all employers that are not community-
 rated employers the 1 percent payroll assessment applied to 
 corporate alliances under S.1757, the Health Security Act.
 (3) An increase in the cigarette tax of 75 cents per pack 
 in excess of the amount specified in S.1757, the Health 
 Security Act.
 (4) A phased-in 1 percent premium assessment equal to the 
 additional amount provided for biomedical research under title 
 III of this Act.
 (b) Research and Development Tax Credit.--It is the sense of the 
Committee on Labor and Human Resources of the Senate that when health 
reform legislation is enacted it should include the following provision 
not within the jurisdiction of the Committee:
 (1) The permanent extension of the research and development 
 tax credit.

SEC. 1918. SENSE OF THE COMMITTEE CONCERNING MEDICAL SAVINGS ACCOUNTS.

 It is the sense of the Committee on Labor and Human Resources of 
the Senate that provisions encouraging the establishment of medical 
savings accounts be included in any health reform bill passed by the 
Senate, in conjunction with a comprehensive benefit package described 
in subtitle B of this title.

 TITLE II--LONG-TERM CARE

 Part 1--State Programs for Home and Community-based Services for 
 subpart a--home and community-based services
Sec. 2101. State programs for home and community-based services for 
 individuals with disabilities.
Sec. 2102. State plans.
Sec. 2103. Individuals with disabilities defined.
Sec. 2104. Home and community-based services covered under State plan.
Sec. 2105. Cost sharing.
Sec. 2106. Quality assurance and safeguards.
Sec. 2107. Advisory groups.
Sec. 2108. Payments to States.
Sec. 2109. Total Federal budget; allotments to States.
Secsubpart b--state programs for extended services for children with 
 special health care needs
Sec. 2111. State programs for extended services for children with 
 special health care needs.
Sec. 2112. Extended services covered under the State plan.
Sec. 2213. Children eligible for services.
Sec. 2114. Application and administration.
Sec. 2115. Cost-sharing.
Sec. 2116. Program evaluation.
Sec. 2117. Total Federal budget and Federal allotment to States.
 Part 2--Long-term Care Insurance Improvement and Accountability

Sec. 2201. Short title.
Sec. 2202. Establishment of Federal standards for long-term care 
 insurance.
 Part 3--Life Care

Sec. 2301. Short title.
Sec. 2302. Life care: public insurance program for nursing home care.
Sec. 2303. Sense of the Committee concerning PACE (Program of All-
 Inclusive Care for the Elderly).

 PART 1--STATE PROGRAMS FOR HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES FOR 
 INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES

 Subpart A--Home and Community-Based Services

SEC. 2101. STATE PROGRAMS FOR HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES FOR 
 INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES.

 (a) In General.--Each State that has a plan for the home and 
community-based services to individuals with disabilities submitted to 
and approved by the Secretary under section 2102(b) is entitled to 
payment in accordance with section 2108.
 (b) Entitlement to Services.--Nothing in this part shall be 
construed to create a right to services for individuals or a 
requirement that a State with an approved plan expend the entire amount 
of funds to which it is entitled under this subtitle, except that 
nothing in this subtitle shall be construed to restrict or modify an 
individual's right under existing Federal or State law to enforce the 
obligations of States entered into pursuant to this Act.
 (c) Designation of Agency.--Not later than 6 months after the date 
of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall designate an agency 
responsible for program administration under this subtitle.

SEC. 2102. STATE PLANS.

 (a) Plan Requirements.--In order to be approved under subsection 
(b), a State plan for home and community-based services for individuals 
with disabilities must meet the following requirements:
 (1) Eligibility.--
 (A) In general.--Within the amounts provided by the 
 State (and under section 2108) for such plan, the plan 
 shall provide that services under the plan will be 
 available to individuals with disabilities (as defined 
 in section 2103(a)) in the State.
 (B) Initial screening.--The plan shall provide a 
 process for the initial screening of individuals who 
 appear to have some reasonable likelihood of being an 
 individual with disabilities. Any such process shall 
 require the provision of assistance to individuals who 
 wish to apply but whose disability limits their ability 
 to do so. Except as provided in subparagraph (C), the 
 initial screening, as well as the determination of 
 disability (as defined under section 2103(b)(1)) and 
 the comprehensive assessment and individualized plan of 
 care (as defined under section 2104(b)(1)(A) and (B)) 
 and 2104(b)(2) (A) and (B) shall be provided by public 
 or private nonprofit agencies that--
 (i) do not provide home and community-based 
 services covered under the State plan, with the 
 exception of care management services;
 (ii) do not provide nursing facility 
 services; and
 (iii) do not have a direct or indirect 
 ownership or control interest in an entity that 
 provides home and community-based services or 
 nursing facility services.
 (C) Screening agency exceptions.--The provisions of 
 subparagraph (B)(i), (ii) and (iii) shall not apply to 
 providers of residential care. The State agency may 
 elect to waive the provisions of subparagraph (B)(i), 
 (ii), and (iii) in areas of the State in which there is 
 an insufficiency of available service providers.
 (D) Restrictions.--The plan may not limit the 
 eligibility of individuals with disabilities based on--
 (i) income,
 (ii) age,
 (iii) geography,
 (iv) nature, severity, or category of 
 disability,
 (v) residential setting (other than an 
 institutional setting), or
 (vi) other grounds specified by the 
 Secretary;
 except that during the initial phase-in period the 
 Secretary may permit a State to limit eligibility based 
 on level of disability or geography (if the State 
 assures a balance between urban and rural areas).
 (E) Continuation of services.--The plan must 
 provide assurances that, in the case of an individual 
 receiving medical assistance for home and community-
 based services under the State medicaid plan as of the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, the State will 
 continue to make available (either under this plan, 
 under the State medicaid plan, or otherwise) to such 
 individual an appropriate level of assistance for home 
 and community-based services, taking into account the 
 level of assistance provided as of such date and the 
 individual's need for home and community-based 
 services.
 (2) Services.--
 (A) Needs assessment.--Not later than the end of 
 the second year of implementation, the plan or its 
 amendments shall include the results of a statewide 
 assessment of the needs of individuals with 
 disabilities, in a format required by the Secretary. 
 The needs assessment shall include demographic data 
 concerning the number of individuals within each 
 category of disability described in this Act, and the 
 services available to meet the needs of such 
 individuals.
 (B) Specification.--Consistent with section 2104, 
 the plan shall specify--
 (i) the services made available under the 
 plan,
 (ii) the extent and manner in which such 
 services are allocated and made available to 
 individuals with disabilities, and
 (iii) the manner in which services under 
 the plan are coordinated with each other and 
 with health and long-term care services 
 available outside the plan for individuals with 
 disabilities.
 (C) Taking into account informal care.--A State 
 plan may take into account, in determining the amount 
 and array of services made available to covered 
 individuals with disability, the availability of 
 informal care. Any individual care plan that includes 
 informal care shall be required to verify the 
 availability of the informal care.
 (D) Allocation.--The State plan--
 (i) shall specify how it will allocate 
 services under the plan, during and after the 
 7-fiscal-year phase-in period beginning with 
 fiscal year 1996, among covered individuals 
 with disabilities,
 (ii) shall attempt to meet the needs of 
 individuals with a variety of disabilities and, 
 within the limits of available funding, be 
 sufficient in amount, duration, and scope to 
 provide a substantial assistance in living 
 independently,
 (iii) shall include services that are 
 determined to be necessary to help all 
 categories of individuals with disabilities, 
 regardless of their age or the nature of their 
 disabling conditions,
 (iv) shall demonstrate that services are 
 allocated equitably, in accordance with the 
 needs assessment required under subparagraph 
 (A), and
 (v) shall ensure that--
 (I) the proportion of the 
 population of low-income individuals 
 with disabilities in the State that 
 represents individuals with 
 disabilities who are provided home and 
 community-based services either under 
 the plan, under the State medicaid 
 plan, or under both, is not less than,
 (II) the proportion of the 
 population of the State that represents 
 individuals who are low-income 
 individuals.
 (E) Limitation on licensure or certification.--The 
 State may not subject consumer-directed providers of 
 personal assistance services to licensure, 
 certification, or other requirements which the 
 Secretary finds not to be necessary for the health and 
 safety of individuals with disabilities.
 (F) Consumer choice.--To the extent feasible, the 
 State shall follow the choice of an individual with 
 disabilities (or that individual's designated 
 representative who may be a family member) regarding 
 which covered services to receive and the providers who 
 will provide such services.
 (3) Cost sharing.--The plan shall impose cost sharing with 
 respect to covered services only in accordance with section 
 2105.
 (4) Types of providers and requirements for 
 participation.--The plan shall specify--
 (A) the types of service providers eligible to 
 participate in the program under the plan, which shall 
 include consumer-directed providers, except that the 
 plan--
 (i) may not limit such benefits to services 
 provided by registered nurses or licensed 
 practical nurses; and
 (ii) may not limit such benefits to 
 services provided by agencies or providers 
 certified under title XVIII of the Social 
 Security Act; and
 (B) any requirements for participation applicable 
 to each type of service provider.
 (5) Budget.--The plan shall specify how the State will 
 manage Federal and State funds available under the plan for 
 each fiscal year during the period beginning with fiscal year 
 1996 and ending with fiscal year 2003 and for each 5-fiscal-
 year periods thereafter to serve all categories of individuals 
 with disabilities and meet the requirements of this subsection. 
 If the Secretary makes an adjustment under section 
 2109(a)(5)(C) for a year, each State shall update the 
 specifications under this paragraph to reflect the impact of 
 such an adjustment.
 (6) Provider reimbursement.--
 (A) Payment methods.--The plan shall specify the 
 payment methods to be used to reimburse providers for 
 services furnished under the plan. Such methods may 
 include retrospective reimbursement on a fee-for-
 service basis, prepayment on a capitation basis, 
 payment by cash or vouchers to individuals with 
 disabilities, or any combination of these methods. In 
 the case of payment for consumer-directed services, 
 including the use of cash or vouchers, the plan shall 
 specify how the plan will assure compliance with 
 applicable employment tax and health care coverage 
 provisions.
 (B) Payment rates.--The plan shall specify the 
 methods and criteria to be used to set payment rates 
 for--
 (i) agency administered services furnished 
 under the plan; and
 (ii) consumer-directed services furnished 
 under the plan, including cash payments or 
 vouchers to individuals with disabilities, 
 except that such payments shall be adequate to 
 cover amounts required under the applicable 
 employment tax provisions of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 (as added or amended by 
 title VII of the Health Security Act) and the 
 health care coverage provisions under this Act.
 (C) Plan payment as payment in full.--The plan 
 shall restrict payment under the plan for covered 
 services to those providers that agree to accept the 
 payment under the plan (at the rates established 
 pursuant to subparagraph (B)) and any cost sharing 
 permitted or provided for under section 2105 as payment 
 in full for services furnished under the plan.
 (7) Quality assurance and safeguards.--The State plan shall 
 provide for quality assurance and safeguards for applicants and 
 beneficiaries in accordance with section 2106.
 (8) Advisory group.--The State plan shall--
 (A) assure the establishment and maintenance of an 
 advisory group under section 2107(b), and
 (B) include the documentation prepared by the group 
 under section 2107(b)(4).
 (9) Administration and access.--
 (A) State agency.--The plan shall designate a State 
 agency or agencies to administer (or to supervise the 
 administration of) the plan.
 (B) Information and assistance center.--The plan 
 shall provide for a single point of access to 
 information about the system for individuals with 
 disabilities. The plan may designate separate entry 
 points for individuals under the age of 22, for 
 individuals age 65 years and older, or for other 
 appropriate classification of individuals.
 (C) Coordination.--The plan shall specify how it 
 will--
 (i) integrate services provided under the 
 plan, including eligibility prescreening, 
 service coordination, and referrals for 
 individuals with disabilities who are 
 ineligible for services under this part, with 
 the State medicaid plan, titles V and XX of the 
 Social Security Act, programs under the Older 
 Americans Act of 1965, programs under the 
 Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill 
 of Rights Act, the Individuals with 
 Disabilities Education Act, and any other 
 Federal or State programs that provide services 
 or assistance targeted to individuals with 
 disabilities, and
 (ii) coordinate with health plans.
 (D) Administrative expenditures.--The plan shall 
 contain assurances that not more than 10 percent of 
 expenditures under the plan for all quarters in any 
 fiscal year shall be for administrative costs, except 
 that, in fiscal years 1996 through 2002, administrative 
 expenditures for the design, development, and 
 installation of mechanical claims processing systems, 
 information retrieval, and infrastructure development 
 may exceed the limit described in this subparagraph by 
 not more than an additional 10 percent of total 
 expenditures. Quality assurance activities shall not be 
 included as administrative costs. The Secretary shall 
 have the authority to waive the administrative limit.
 (10) Reports and information to secretary; audits.--The 
 plan shall provide that the State will furnish to the 
 Secretary--
 (A) such reports, and will cooperate with such 
 audits, as the Secretary determines are needed 
 concerning the State's administration of its plan under 
 this part, including the processing of claims under the 
 plan, and
 (B) such data and information as the Secretary may 
 require in a uniform format as specified by the 
 Secretary.
 (11) Use of state funds for matching.--The plan shall 
 provide assurances that Federal funds will not be used to 
 provide for the State share of expenditures under this part.
 (12) Health care worker redeployment requirement.--The plan 
 provides for compliance with the requirement of section 
 3083(a).
 (13) Terminology.--The plan shall adhere to uniform 
 definitions of terms, as specified by the Secretary.
 (b) Approval of Plans.--The Secretary shall approve a plan 
submitted by a State if the Secretary determines that the plan--
 (1) was developed by the State after a public comment 
 period of not less than 30 days, and
 (2) meets the requirements of subsection (a).
The approval of such a plan shall take effect as of the first day of 
the first fiscal year beginning after the date of such approval (except 
that any approval made before January 1, 1996, shall be effective as of 
January 1, 1996). In order to budget funds allotted under this part, 
the Secretary may establish a deadline for the submission of such a 
plan before the beginning of a fiscal year as a condition of its 
approval effective with that fiscal year. Any significant changes to 
the State plan shall be submitted to the Secretary in the form of plan 
amendments and shall be subject to approval by the Secretary.
 (c) Monitoring.--The Secretary shall annually monitor the 
compliance of State plans with the requirements of this subtitle 
according to specified performance standards. States that fail to 
comply with such requirements may be subject to the withholding of 
Federal funds for services or administration until such time as 
compliance is achieved.
 (d) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary shall ensure the 
availability of ongoing technical assistance to States under this 
section. Such assistance shall include serving as a clearinghouse for 
information regarding successful practices in providing long-term care 
services.
 (e) Regulations.--The Secretary shall issue such regulations as may 
be appropriate to carry out this part on a timely basis.

SEC. 2103. INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES DEFINED.

 (a) In General.--In this part, the term ``individual with 
disabilities'' means any individual within one or more of the following 
4 categories of individuals:
 (1) Individuals requiring help with activities of daily 
 living.--Except as provided in section 2103(a)(4) an individual 
 of any age who--
 (A) requires hands-on or standby assistance, 
 supervision, or cueing (as defined in regulations) to 
 perform three or more activities of daily living (as 
 defined in subsection (c)), and
 (B) is expected to require such assistance, 
 supervision, or cueing over a period of at least 90 
 days.
 (2) Individuals with severe cognitive or mental 
 impairment.--An individual of any age--
 (A) whose score, on a standard mental status 
 protocol (or protocols) appropriate for measuring the 
 individual's particular condition specified by the 
 Secretary, indicates either severe cognitive impairment 
 or severe mental impairment, or both;
 (B) who--
 (i) requires hands-on or standby 
 assistance, supervision, or cueing with one or 
 more activities of daily living,
 (ii) requires hands-on or standby 
 assistance, supervision, or cueing with at 
 least such instrumental activity (or 
 activities) of daily living related to 
 cognitive or mental impairment as the Secretary 
 specifies, or
 (iii) displays symptoms of one or more 
 serious behavioral problems (that is on a list 
 of such problems specified by the Secretary) 
 which create a need for supervision to prevent 
 harm to self or others; and
 (C) who is expected to meet the requirements of 
 subparagraphs (A) and (B) over a period of at least 90 
 days.
 Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, 
 the Secretary shall make recommendations regarding the most 
 appropriate duration of disability under this paragraph.
 (3) Individuals with severe or profound mental 
 retardation.--An individual of any age who has severe or 
 profound mental retardation (as determined according to a 
 protocol specified by the Secretary).
 (4) Young children with severe disabilities.--An individual 
 under 6 years of age who--
 (A) has a severe disability or chronic medical 
 condition that limits functioning in a manner that is 
 comparable in severity to the standards established 
 under paragraphs (1), (2), or (3), and
 (B) is expected to have such a disability or 
 condition and require such services over a period of at 
 least 90 days.
 (b) Determination.--
 (1) In general.--In formulating eligibility criteria under 
 subsection (a), the Secretary shall establish criteria for 
 assessing the functional level of disability among all 
 categories of individuals with disabilities that are comparable 
 in severity, regardless of the age or the nature of the 
 disabling condition of the individual. The determination of 
 whether an individual is an individual with disabilities shall 
 be made, by persons or entities specified under the State plan, 
 using a uniform protocol consisting of an initial screening and 
 preliminary assessment specified by the Secretary. A State may 
 not impose cost sharing with respect to the preliminary 
 assessment. A State may collect additional information, at the 
 time of obtaining information to make such determination, in 
 order to provide for the assessment and plan described in 
 section 2104(b) or for other purposes. The State shall 
 establish a fair hearing process for appeals of such 
 determinations.
 (2) Individuals with comparable disabilities.--Not more 
 than 2 percent of a State's allotment for services under this 
 part may be expended for the provision of services to 
 individuals with severe disabilities that are comparable in 
 severity to the criteria described in subsection (a), but who 
 fail to meet the criteria described in any single category.
 (3) Periodic reassessment.--The determination that an 
 individual is an individual with disabilities shall be 
 considered to be effective under the State plan for a period of 
 not more than 6 months (or for such longer period in such cases 
 as a significant change in an individual's condition that may 
 affect such determination is unlikely). A reassessment shall be 
 made if there is a significant change in an individual's 
 condition that may affect such determination.
 (c) Reassessments.--The Secretary shall reassess the validity of 
the eligibility criteria described in subsection (a) as new knowledge 
regarding the assessments of functional disabilities becomes available. 
The Secretary shall report to the Committee on Labor and Human 
Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the 
House of Representatives on its findings not later than 5 years after 
the date of enactment of this Act.
 (d) Activity of Daily Living Defined.--In this part, the term 
``activity of daily living'' means any of the following: eating, 
toileting, dressing, bathing, and transferring.

SEC. 2104. HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES COVERED UNDER STATE PLAN.

 (a) Specification.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to the succeeding provisions of 
 this section, the State plan under this part shall specify--
 (A) the home and community-based services available 
 under the plan to individuals with disabilities (or to 
 such categories of such individuals), and
 (B) any limits with respect to such services, 
 except that within the limits of available funding, 
 such services shall be sufficient in amount, duration, 
 and scope to provide substantial assistance in living 
 independently.
 (2) Flexibility in meeting individual needs.--Subject to 
 subsection (e)(1)(B), such services may be delivered in an 
 individual's home, a range of community residential 
 arrangements, or outside the home.
 (b) Requirement for Care Management.--
 (1) In general.--The State shall make available to each 
 category of individual with disabilities care management 
 services that at a minimum include--
 (A) a comprehensive assessment of the individual's 
 need for home and community-based services (regardless 
 of whether all needed services are available under the 
 plan),
 (B) an individualized plan of care based on such 
 assessment,
 (C) services consistent with such plan of care,
 (D) arrangements for the provision of such 
 services, and
 (E) monitoring of the delivery of services.
 (2) Home and community-based services.--The State shall 
 provide for home and community-based services to an individual 
 with disabilities only if--
 (A) a comprehensive assessment of the individual's 
 need for home and community-based services (regardless 
 of whether all needed services are available under the 
 plan) has been made,
 (B) an individualized plan of care based on such 
 assessment is developed, and
 (C) such services are provided consistent with such 
 plan of care.
 The Secretary shall develop a uniform comprehensive assessment 
 tool that shall be used by the States under subparagraph (A). 
 Alternative comprehensive assessment tools may be used by the 
 States only with the approval of the Secretary. The Secretary 
 shall provide guidance to the States with regard to the 
 appropriate qualifications for individuals who conduct 
 comprehensive assessments.
 (3) Involvement of individuals.--The individualized plan of 
 care under paragraphs (1)(B) and (2)(B) for an individual with 
 disabilities shall--
 (A) be developed by qualified individuals 
 (specified under the State plan),
 (B) be developed and implemented in close 
 consultation with the individual or the individual's 
 designated representative,
 (C) be approved by the individual (or the 
 individual's designated representative), and
 (D) be reviewed and updated not less often than 
 every 6 months.
 (4) Plan of care.--The plan of care under paragraphs (1)(B) 
 and (2)(B) shall--
 (A) specify which services specified under the 
 individual plan will be provided under the State plan 
 under this part,
 (B) identify (to the extent possible) how the 
 individual will be provided any services specified 
 under the plan of care and not provided under the State 
 plan, and
 (C) specify how the provision of services to the 
 individual under the plan will be coordinated with the 
 provision of other health care services to the 
 individual.
 The State shall make reasonable efforts to identify and arrange 
 for services described in subparagraph (B). Nothing in this 
 subsection shall be construed as requiring a State (under the 
 State plan or otherwise) to provide all the services specified 
 in such a plan.
 (c) Mandatory Coverage of Personal Assistance Services.--The State 
plan shall include, in the array of services made available to each 
category of individuals with disabilities, both agency-administered and 
consumer-directed personal assistance services (as defined in 
subsection (g)).
 (d) Additional Services.--
 (1) Types of services.--Subject to subsection (e), services 
 available under a State plan under this part shall include any 
 (or all) of the following:
 (A) Homemaker and chore assistance.
 (B) Home modifications.
 (C) Respite services.
 (D) Assistive devices, as defined in the Technology 
 Related Assistance for Individuals with Disabilities 
 Act.
 (E) Adult day services.
 (F) Habilitation and rehabilitation.
 (G) Supported employment.
 (H) Home health services.
 (I) Transportation.
 (J) Any other care or assistive services (approved 
 by the Secretary) that the State determines will help 
 individuals with disabilities to remain in their homes 
 and communities.
 (2) Criteria for selection of services.--The State plan 
 shall specify--
 (A) the methods and standards used to select the 
 types, and the amount, duration, and scope, of services 
 to be covered under the plan and to be available to 
 each category of individuals with disabilities, and
 (B) how the types, and the amount, duration, and 
 scope, of services specified, within the limits of 
 available funding, provide substantial assistance in 
 living independently to individuals within each of the 
 4 categories of individuals with disabilities.
 Not later than the date on which the plan is fully phased-in, 
 the State shall ensure that a full array of services is 
 available to meet the needs of individuals with disabilities.
 (e) Exclusions and Limitations.--A State plan may not provide for 
coverage of--
 (1) room and board,
 (2) services furnished in a hospital, nursing facility, 
 intermediate care facility for the mentally retarded, or other 
 institutional setting specified by the Secretary, or
 (3) items and services to the extent coverage is provided 
 for the individual under a health plan or the medicare program.
 (f) Payment for Services.--A State plan may provide for the use 
of--
 (1) vouchers,
 (2) cash payments directly to individuals with 
 disabilities,
 (3) capitation payments to health plans, and
 (4) payment to providers,
to pay for covered services.
 (g) Personal Assistance Services.--
 (1) In general.--In this section, the term ``personal 
 assistance services'' means those services specified under the 
 State plan as personal assistance services and shall include at 
 least hands-on and standby assistance, supervision, and cueing 
 with activities of daily living and for people with primarily 
 mental, cognitive or sensory impairments such instrumental 
 activities of daily living as deemed necessary or appropriate, 
 whether agency-administered or consumer-directed (as defined in 
 paragraph (2)). Such services shall include services that are 
 determined to be necessary to help all categories of 
 individuals with disabilities, regardless of their age or the 
 nature of their disabling conditions,
 (2) Consumer-directed.--In this part:
 (A) In general.--The term ``consumer-directed'' 
 means, with reference to personal assistance services 
 or the provider of such services, services that are 
 provided by an individual who is selected and managed 
 (and, at the option of the service recipient, trained) 
 by the individual receiving the services.
 (B) State responsibilities.--A State plan shall 
 ensure that where services are provided in a consumer-
 directed manner, the State shall create or contract 
 with an entity, other than the consumer or the 
 individual provider, to--
 (i) inform both recipients and providers of 
 rights and responsibilities under all 
 applicable Federal labor and tax law; and
 (ii) assume responsibility for providing 
 effective billing, payments for services, tax 
 withholding, unemployment insurance, and 
 workers' compensation coverage, and act as the 
 employer of the home care provider.
 (C) Right of consumers.--Notwithstanding the State 
 responsibilities described in subparagraph (B), service 
 recipients, and, where appropriate, their designated 
 representative, shall retain the right to independently 
 select, hire, terminate, and direct (including manage, 
 train, schedule, and verify services provided) the work 
 of a home care provider.
 (3) Agency administered.--The term ``agency-administered'' 
 means, with respect to such services, services that are not 
 consumer-directed.

SEC. 2105. COST SHARING.

 (a) No Cost Sharing for Poorest.--The State plan may not impose any 
cost sharing for individuals with income (as determined under 
subsection (c)) less than 150 percent of the official poverty level 
(referred to in section 1902(30)) applicable to a family of the size 
involved (determined without regard to section 1902(30)(B)).
 (b) Sliding Scale for Remainder.--The State plan shall impose cost 
sharing in the form of coinsurance (based on the amount paid under the 
State plan for a service)--
 (1) at a rate of 10 percent for individuals with 
 disabilities with income not less than 150 percent, and less 
 than 200 percent, of such official poverty line (as so 
 applied);
 (2) at a rate of 20 percent for such individuals with 
 income not less than 200 percent, and less than 250 percent, of 
 such official poverty line (as so applied); and
 (3) at a rate of 25 percent for such individuals with 
 income equal to at least 250 percent of such official poverty 
 line (as so applied).
 (c) Recommendation of the Secretary.--The Secretary shall make 
recommendations to the States as to how to reduce cost-sharing for 
individuals with extraordinary out-of-pocket costs for whom the cost-
sharing provisions of section 2105 could jeopardize their ability to 
take advantage of the services offered under this Act. The Secretary 
shall establish a methodology for reducing the cost-sharing burden for 
individuals with exceptionally high out-of-pocket costs under this Act.
 (d) Determination of Income for Purposes of Cost Sharing.--The 
State plan shall specify the process to be used to determine the income 
of an individual with disabilities for purposes of this section. Such 
standards shall include a uniform Federal definition of income and any 
allowable deductions from income.

SEC. 2106. QUALITY ASSURANCE AND SAFEGUARDS.

 (a) Minimum Requirements for Providers.--
 (1) In general.--Providers of home and community-based 
 services under this subtitle must, as a condition of 
 participation under this subtitle, meet such requirements for 
 quality assurance and safeguards as shall be established by the 
 Secretary under this section. Such requirements will include at 
 a minimum:
 (A) Quality assurance.--Not later than January 1, 
 1995, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations 
 specifying how the States will ensure and monitor the 
 quality of services, including--
 (i) safeguarding the health and safety of 
 individuals with disabilities, including the 
 use of periodic surveys of providers;
 (ii) the minimum standards for agency 
 providers, including certification, and how 
 such standards will be enforced;
 (iii) the minimum competency requirements, 
 including education and training requirements, 
 for agency provider employees who provide 
 direct services under this part and how the 
 competency of such employees will be enforced;
 (iv) obtaining meaningful consumer input, 
 including consumer surveys that measure the 
 extent to which participants receive the 
 services described in the plan of care and 
 participant satisfaction with such services;
 (v) participation in quality assurance 
 activities; and
 (vi) the role of existing State consumer 
 protection and advocacy resources, particularly 
 the long-term care ombudsman (under the Older 
 Americans Act of 1965) and the Protection and 
 Advocacy Agency (under the Developmental 
 Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights Act) 
 in assuring quality of services and protecting 
 the rights of individuals with disabilities.
 (B) Safeguards.--Not later than January 1, 1995, 
 the Secretary shall promulgate regulations providing 
 the following:
 (i) Confidentiality.--The regulations shall 
 provide safeguards which restrict the use of 
 disclosure of information concerning applicants 
 and beneficiaries to purposes directly 
 connected with the administration of the plan 
 (including performance reviews under this 
 section).
 (ii) Safeguards against abuse.--The 
 regulations shall provide safeguards against 
 physical, emotional, or financial abuse or 
 exploitation (specifically including 
 appropriate safeguards in cases where payment 
 for program benefits is made by cash payment or 
 vouchers given directly to individuals with 
 disabilities.
 (2) No delegation to states.--The Secretary's authority 
 under this subsection shall not be delegated to States.
 (3) No prevention of more stringent requirements by states 
 .--Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing 
 States from imposing requirements that are more stringent than 
 the requirements established by the Secretary under this 
 subsection.
 (b) Federal Standards.--The State plan shall adhere to Federal 
quality standards in the following areas:
 (1) Case review of a specified sample of client records.
 (2) Random home visits for a specified percentage of cases.
 (3) The mandatory reporting of abuse, neglect, or 
 exploitation.
 (4) The establishment of a formal client grievance 
 mechanism, including a fair hearing process.
 (5) State licensure or certification for agency providers 
 that offer home health services.
 (6) Minimum training requirements for agency-directed home 
 care workers.
 (7) The development of a registry of provider agencies or 
 home care workers against whom any complaints have been 
 sustained, which shall be available to the public.
 (8) Sanctions to be imposed on States or providers, 
 including disqualification from the program, if minimum 
 standards are not met.
 (9) Surveys of client satisfaction.
 (10) State optional training programs for informal 
 caregivers.
 (c) Funding.--A State that is entitled to a payment in accordance 
with section 2108 shall receive a separate allocation that may be 
expended only for client advocacy activities. The State may use such 
funds to augment the budgets of the long-term care ombudsman (under the 
Older Americans Act of 1965) and the Protection and Advocacy Agency 
(under the Developmental Disabilities Assistance and Bill of Rights 
Act) or may establish a separate and independent agency to administer a 
new program designed to advocate for client rights.
 (d) Functions.--
 (1) In general.--A client advocacy office established under 
 this section shall--
 (A) identify, investigate, and resolve complaints 
 that--
 (i) are made by, or on behalf of, clients; 
 and
 (ii) relate to action, inaction, or 
 decisions, that may adversely affect the 
 health, safety, welfare, or rights of the 
 clients (including the welfare and rights of 
 the clients with respect to the appointment and 
 activities of guardians and representative 
 payees), of--
 (I) providers, or representatives 
 of providers, of long-term care 
 services;
 (II) public agencies; or
 (III) health and social service 
 agencies;
 (B) provide services to assist the clients in 
 protecting the health, safety, welfare, and rights of 
 the clients;
 (C) inform the clients about means of obtaining 
 services provided by providers or agencies described in 
 subparagraph (A)(ii) or services described in 
 subparagraph (B);
 (D) ensure that the clients have regular and timely 
 access to the services provided through the office and 
 that the clients and complainants receive timely 
 responses from representatives of the office to 
 complaints; and
 (E) represent the interests of the clients before 
 governmental agencies and seek administrative, legal, 
 and other remedies to protect the health, safety, 
 welfare, and rights of the clients with regard to the 
 provisions of this title and related concerns under 
 this Act.
 (2) Contracts and arrangements.--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph 
 (B), the State agency may establish and operate the 
 office, and carry out the program, directly, or by 
 contract or other arrangement with any public agency or 
 nonprofit private organization.
 (B) Licensing and certification organizations; 
 associations.--The State agency may not enter into the 
 contract or other arrangement described in subparagraph 
 (A) with an agency or organization that is responsible 
 for licensing, certifying, or providing long-term care 
 services in the State.
 (e) Safeguards.--
 (1) Confidentiality.--The State plan shall provide 
 safeguards which restrict the use or disclosure of information 
 concerning applicants and beneficiaries to purposes directly 
 connected with the administration of the plan (including 
 performance reviews under section 2602).
 (2) Safeguards against abuse.--The State plans shall 
 provide safeguards against physical, emotional, or financial 
 abuse or exploitation (specifically including appropriate 
 safeguards in cases where payment for program benefits is made 
 by cash payments or vouchers given directly to individuals with 
 disabilities). All providers of services shall be required to 
 register with the State agency.
 (f) Issuance of Regulations.--Not later than 1 year after the date 
of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall issue regulations 
implementing the quality provisions of this section.

SEC. 2107. ADVISORY GROUPS.

 (a) Federal Advisory Group.--
 (1) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish an 
 advisory group, to advise the Secretary and States on all 
 aspects of the program under this part.
 (2) Composition.--The group shall be composed of 
 individuals with disabilities and their representatives, 
 providers, Federal and State officials, and local community 
 implementing agencies. A majority of its members shall be 
 individuals with disabilities and their representatives.
 (b) State Advisory Groups.--
 (1) In general.--Each State plan shall provide for the 
 establishment and maintenance of an advisory group to advise 
 the State on all aspects of the State plan under this part.
 (2) Composition.--Members of each advisory group shall be 
 appointed by the Governor (or other chief executive officer of 
 the State) and shall include individuals with disabilities and 
 their representatives, providers, State officials, and local 
 community implementing agencies. A majority of its members 
 shall be individuals with disabilities and their 
 representatives. The members of the advisory group shall be 
 selected from the those nominated as described in section 
 2107(b)(3).
 (3) Selection of members.--Each State shall establish a 
 process whereby all residents of the State, including 
 individuals with disabilities and their representatives, shall 
 be given the opportunity to nominate members to the advisory 
 group.
 (4) Particular concerns.--Each advisory group shall--
 (A) before the State plan is developed, advise the 
 State on guiding principles and values, policy 
 directions, and specific components of the plan,
 (B) meet regularly with State officials involved in 
 developing the plan, during the development phase, to 
 review and comment on all aspects of the plan,
 (C) participate in the public hearings to help 
 assure that public comments are addressed to the extent 
 practicable,
 (D) report to the Governor and make available to 
 the public any differences between the group's 
 recommendations and the plan,
 (E) report to the Governor and make available to 
 the public specifically the degree to which the plan is 
 consumer-directed, and
 (F) meet regularly with officials of the designated 
 State agency (or agencies) to provide advice on all 
 aspects of implementation and evaluation of the plan.

SEC. 2108. PAYMENTS TO STATES.

 (a) In General.--Subject to section 2102(a)(9)(D) (relating to 
limitation on payment for administrative costs), the Secretary, in 
accordance with the Cash Management Improvement Act, shall authorize 
payment to each State with a plan approved under this part, for each 
quarter (beginning on or after January 1, 1996), from its allotment 
under section 2109(b), an amount equal to--
 (1) the Federal matching percentage (as defined in 
 subsection (b)) of amount demonstrated by State claims to have 
 been expended during the quarter for home and community-based 
 services under the plan for individuals with disabilities; plus
 (2) an amount equal to 90 percent of the amount 
 demonstrated by the State to have been expended during the 
 quarter for quality assurance activities under the plan; plus
 (3) an amount equal to 90 percent of amount expended during 
 the quarter under the plan for activities (including 
 preliminary screening) relating to determination of eligibility 
 and performance of needs assessment; plus
 (4) an amount equal to 90 percent (or, beginning with 
 quarters in fiscal year 2003, 75 percent) of the amount 
 expended during the quarter for the design, development, and 
 installation of mechanical claims processing systems and for 
 information retrieval; plus
 (5) an amount equal to 90 percent (or, beginning with 
 quarters in fiscal year 2003, the Federal matching percentage) 
 of the amount expended during the quarter for infrastructure 
 development, as defined by the Secretary; plus
 (6) an amount equal to 50 percent of the remainder of the 
 amounts expended during the quarter as found necessary by the 
 Secretary for the proper and efficient administration of the 
 State plan; plus
 (7) an amount equal to .5 percent of the State's total 
 allotment for client advocacy activities described in section 
 2106(c).
 (b) Federal Matching Percentage.--
 (1) In general.--In subsection (a), the term ``Federal 
 matching percentage'' means, with respect to a State, the 
 reference percentage specified in paragraph (2) increased by 
 17.5 percentage points, except that the Federal matching 
 percentage shall in no case be less than 67.5 percent or more 
 than 95 percent.
 (2) Reference percentage.--
 (A) In general.--The reference percentage specified 
 in this paragraph is 100 percent less the State 
 percentage specified in subparagraph (B), except that--
 (i) the percentage under this paragraph 
 shall in no case be less than 50 percent or 
 more than 83 percent, and
 (ii) the percentage for Puerto Rico, the 
 Virgin Islands, Guam, the Northern Mariana 
 Islands, and American Samoa shall be 50 
 percent.
 (B) State percentage.--The State percentage 
 specified in this subparagraph is that percentage which 
 bears the same ratio to 45 percent as the square of the 
 per capita income of such State bears to the square of 
 the per capita income of the continental United States 
 (including Alaska) and Hawaii.
 (c) Payments on Estimates with Retrospective Adjustments.--The 
method of computing and making payments under this section shall be as 
follows:
 (1) The Secretary shall, prior to the beginning of each 
 quarter, estimate the amount to be paid to the State under 
 subsection (a) for such quarter, based on a report filed by the 
 State containing its estimate of the total sum to be expended 
 in such quarter, and such other information as the Secretary 
 may find necessary.
 (2) From the allotment available therefore, the Secretary 
 shall provide for payment of the amount so estimated, reduced 
 or increased, as the case may be, by any sum (not previously 
 adjusted under this section) by which the Secretary finds that 
 the estimate of the amount to be paid the State for any prior 
 period under this section was greater or less than the amount 
 which should have been paid.
 (d) Application of Rules Regarding Limitations on Provider-Related 
Donations and Health Care Related Taxes.--The provisions of section 
1903(w) of the Social Security Act shall apply to payments to States 
under this section in the same manner as they apply to payments to 
States under section 1903(a) of such Act .

SEC. 2109. APPROPRIATION; ALLOTMENTS TO STATES.

 (a) Appropriation.--
 (1) Fiscal years 1996 through 2003.--Subject to paragraph 
 (5)(C), for purposes of this part, the appropriation authorized 
 under this part for each of fiscal years 1996 through 2003 is 
 the following:
 (A) For fiscal year 1996, $3,900,000,000.
 (B) For fiscal year 1997, $6,800,000,000.
 (C) For fiscal year 1998, $9,600,000,000.
 (D) For fiscal year 1999, $12,900,000,000.
 (E) For fiscal year 2000, $16,400,000,000.
 (F) For fiscal year 2001, $23,400,000,000.
 (G) For fiscal year 2002, $31,100,000,000.
 (H) For fiscal year 2003, $33,600,000,000.
 (2) Subsequent fiscal years.--For purposes of this part, 
 the total Federal budget for State plans under this part for 
 each fiscal year after fiscal year 2003 is the total Federal 
 budget under this subsection for the preceding fiscal year 
 multiplied by--
 (A) a factor (described in paragraph (3)) 
 reflecting the change in the CPI for the fiscal year, 
 and
 (B) a factor (described in paragraph (4)) 
 reflecting the change in the number of individuals with 
 disabilities for the fiscal year.
 (3) CPI increase factor.--For purposes of paragraph (2)(A), 
 the factor described in this paragraph for a fiscal year is the 
 ratio of--
 (A) the annual average index of the consumer price 
 index for the preceding fiscal year, to--
 (B) such index, as so measured, for the second 
 preceding fiscal year.
 (4) Disabled population factor.--For purposes of paragraph 
 (2)(B), the factor described in this paragraph for a fiscal 
 year is 100 percent plus (or minus) the percentage increase (or 
 decrease) change in the disabled population of the United 
 States (as determined for purposes of the most recent update 
 under subsection (b)(3)(D)).
 (5) Additional funds due to medicaid offsets.--
 (A) In general.--Each participating State must 
 provide the Secretary with information concerning 
 offsets and reductions in the medicaid program 
 resulting from home and community-based services 
 provided disabled individuals under this part, that 
 would have been paid for such individuals under the 
 State medicaid plan but for the provision of similar 
 services under the program under this part. At the time 
 a State first submits its plan under this title and 
 before each subsequent fiscal year (through fiscal year 
 2003), the State also must provide the Secretary with 
 such budgetary information (for each fiscal year 
 through fiscal year 2003), as the Secretary determines 
 to be necessary to carry out this paragraph.
 (B) Reports.--Each State with a program under this 
 part shall submit such reports to the Secretary as the 
 Secretary may require in order to monitor compliance 
 with subparagraph (A). The Secretary shall specify the 
 format of such reports and establish uniform data 
 reporting elements.
 (C) Adjustments to federal budget.--
 (i) In general.--For each fiscal year 
 (beginning with fiscal year 1996 and ending 
 with fiscal year 2003) and based on a review of 
 information submitted under subparagraph (A), 
 the Secretary shall determine the amount by 
 which the total Federal budget under subsection 
 (a) will increase. The amount of such increase 
 for a fiscal year shall be limited to the 
 reduction in Federal expenditures of medical 
 assistance (as determined by Secretary) that 
 would have been made under title XIX of the 
 Social Security Act for home and community 
 based services for disabled individuals but for 
 the provision of similar services under the 
 program under this part.
 (ii) Annual publication.--The Secretary 
 shall publish before the beginning of such 
 fiscal year, the revised total Federal budget 
 under this subsection for such fiscal year (and 
 succeeding fiscal years before fiscal year 
 2003).
 (D) No duplicate payment.--No payment may be made 
 to a State under this section for any services to the 
 extent that the State received payment for such 
 services under section 1903(a) of the Social Security 
 Act or title I of this Act.
 (E) Construction.--Nothing in this subsection shall 
 be construed as requiring States to determine 
 eligibility for medical assistance under the State 
 medicaid plan on behalf of individuals receiving 
 assistance under this part.
 (b) Allotments to States.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall allot to each State 
 for each fiscal year an amount that bears the same ratio to the 
 total Federal budget for the fiscal year (specified under 
 paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (a)) as the State allotment 
 factor (under paragraph (2) for the State for the fiscal year) 
 bears to the sum of such factors for all States for that fiscal 
 year. One-half of one percent of the allotment provided under 
 this paragraph shall be used exclusively for client advocacy 
 activities.
 (2) State allotment factor.--
 (A) In general.--For each State for each fiscal 
 year, the Secretary shall compute a State allotment 
 factor equal to the sum of--
 (i) the base allotment factor (specified in 
 subparagraph (B)), and
 (ii) the low income allotment factor 
 (specified in subparagraph (C)),
 for the State for the fiscal year.
 (B) Base allotment factor.--The base allotment 
 factor, specified in this subparagraph, for a State for 
 a fiscal year is equal to the product of the following:
 (i) Number of individuals with 
 disabilities.--The number of individuals with 
 disabilities in the State (determined under 
 paragraph (3)) for the fiscal year.
 (ii) 80 percent of the national per capita 
 budget.--80 percent of the national average per 
 capita budget amount (determined under 
 paragraph (4)) for the fiscal year.
 (iii) Wage adjustment factor.--The wage 
 adjustment factor (determined under paragraph 
 (5)) for the State for the fiscal year.
 (iv) Federal matching rate.--The Federal 
 matching rate (determined under section 
 2108(b)) for the fiscal year.
 (C) Low income allotment factor.--The low income 
 allotment factor, specified in this subparagraph, for a 
 State for a fiscal year is equal to the product of the 
 following:
 (i) Number of individuals with 
 disabilities.--The number of individuals with 
 disabilities in the State (determined under 
 paragraph (3)) for the fiscal year.
 (ii) 10 percent of the national per capita 
 budget.--10 percent of the national average per 
 capita budget amount (determined under 
 paragraph (4)) for the fiscal year.
 (iii) Wage adjustment factor.--The wage 
 adjustment factor (determined under paragraph 
 (5)) for the State for the fiscal year.
 (iv) Federal matching rate.--The Federal 
 matching rate (determined under section 
 2108(b)) for the fiscal year.
 (v) Low income index.--The low income index 
 (determined under paragraph (6)) for the State 
 for the preceding fiscal year.
 (3) Number of individuals with disabilities.--The number of 
 individuals with disabilities in a State for a fiscal year 
 shall be determined as follows:
 (A) Base.--The Secretary shall determine the number 
 of individuals in the State by age, sex, and income 
 category, based on the 1990 decennial census, adjusted 
 (as appropriate) by the March 1994 current population 
 survey.
 (B) Disability prevalence level by population 
 category.--The Secretary shall determine, for each such 
 age, sex, and income category, the national average 
 proportion of the population of such category that 
 represents individuals with disabilities. The Secretary 
 may conduct periodic surveys in order to determine such 
 proportions.
 (C) Base disabled population in a state.--The 
 number of individuals with disabilities in a State in 
 1994 is equal to the sum of the products, for such each 
 age, sex, and income category, of--
 (i) the population of individuals in the 
 State in the category (determined under 
 subparagraph (A)), and
 (ii) the national average proportion for 
 such category (determined under subparagraph 
 (B)).
 (D) Update.--The Secretary shall determine the 
 number of individuals with disabilities in a State in a 
 fiscal year equal to the number determined under 
 subparagraph (C) for the State increased (or decreased) 
 by the percentage increase (or decrease) in the 
 disabled population of the State as determined under 
 the current population survey from 1994 to the year 
 before the fiscal year involved.
 (4) National per capita budget amount.--The national 
 average per capita budget amount, for a fiscal year, is--
 (A) the total Federal budget specified under 
 subsection (a) for the fiscal year; divided by
 (B) the sum, for the fiscal year, of the numbers of 
 individuals with disabilities (determined under 
 paragraph (3)) for all the States for the fiscal year.
 (5) Wage adjustment factor.--The wage adjustment factor, 
 for a State for a fiscal year, is equal to the ratio of--
 (A) the average hourly wages for service workers 
 (other than household or protective services) in the 
 State, to
 (B) the national average hourly wages for service 
 workers (other than household or protective services).
 The hourly wages shall be determined under this paragraph based 
 on data from the most recent decennial census for which such 
 data are available.
 (6) Low income index.--The low income index for each State 
 for a fiscal year is the ratio, determined for the preceding 
 fiscal year, of--
 (A) the percentage of the State's population that 
 has income below 150 percent of the poverty level, to
 (B) the percentage of the population of the United 
 States that has income below 150 percent of the poverty 
 level.
 Such percentages shall be based on data from the most recent 
 decennial census for which such data are available, adjusted by 
 data from the most recent current population survey as 
 determined appropriate by the Secretary.
 (c) Carry-Over.--With respect to fiscal years 1996 through 2003, a 
State shall be permitted to carry-over not more than 25 percent of the 
allotment of such State for expenditures in the subsequent year.
 (d) State Entitlement.--This part constitutes budget authority in 
advance of appropriations Acts, and represents the obligation of the 
Federal Government to provide for the payment to States of amounts 
described in subsection (a).

SEC. 2110. FEDERAL EVALUATIONS.

 Not later than December 31, 2000, December 31, 2003, and each 
December 31 thereafter, the Secretary shall provide to Congress 
analytical reports that evaluate--
 (1) the extent to which individuals with low incomes and 
 disabilities are equitably served;
 (2) the adequacy and equity of service plans to individuals 
 with similar levels of disability across States;
 (3) the comparability of program participation across 
 States, described by level and type of disability; and
 (4) the ability of service providers to sufficiently meet 
 the demand for services.
 Not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act, 
the Secretary shall report to Congress concerning the feasibility of 
providing reimbursement under health plans and other payers of health 
services for full geriatric assessment, when recommended by a 
physician.

 Subpart B--State Programs for Extended Services for Children With 
 Special Health Care Needs

SEC. 2111. STATE PROGRAMS FOR EXTENDED SERVICES FOR CHILDREN WITH 
 SPECIAL HEALTH CARE NEEDS.

 (a) Purpose.--The purpose of this subpart is to provide financial 
assistance to the States to assist each State in developing and 
implementing, or expanding and enhancing, a family-centered, culturally 
competent, community-centered, comprehensive statewide system of 
extended services and benefits for children with special health care 
needs.
 (b) Payment.--Each State that has a plan for the provision of 
extended services for children with special health care needs submitted 
to and approved by the Secretary under section 2114 is entitled to 
payment subject to section 2117. Approval of a plan shall be contingent 
upon adequacy of funding and fulfillment of criteria established and 
published by the Secretary.

SEC. 2112. EXTENDED SERVICES COVERED UNDER THE STATE PLAN.

 (a) Specification.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to the succeeding provisions of 
 this section, the State plan under this subpart shall specify--
 (A) the extended services available under the plan 
 to eligible children, and
 (B) any limits with respect to such services.
 (2) Flexibility in meeting individual needs.--Subject to 
 subsection (e)(1)(B), such services may be delivered in an 
 individual's home, a range of community residential 
 arrangements, or outside the home.
 (b) Requirement for Needs Assessment and Plan of Care.--
 (1) In general.--The State plan shall provide for extended 
 services to an eligible child only if--
 (A) a comprehensive assessment of the child's need 
 for home and community-based services (regardless of 
 whether all needed services are available under the 
 plan) has been made,
 (B) an individualized plan of care based on such 
 assessment is developed, and
 (C) such services are provided consistent with such 
 plan of care.
 (2) Involvement of individuals.--The individualized plan of 
 care under paragraph (1)(B) for an eligible child shall--
 (A) be developed by qualified individuals 
 (specified under the State plan),
 (B) be developed and implemented in close 
 consultation with the child's designated representative 
 and the child where appropriate,
 (C) be approved by the child's designated 
 representative and the child where appropriate, and
 (D) be reviewed and updated not less often than 
 every 6 months.
 (3) Plan of care.--The plan of care under paragraph (1)(B) 
 shall--
 (A) specify which services specified under the 
 individual plan will be provided under the State plan 
 under this part,
 (B) identify (to the extent possible) how the child 
 will be provided any services specified under the plan 
 of care and not provided under the State plan, and
 (C) specify how the provision of services to the 
 child under the plan will be coordinated with the 
 provision of other health care services to the child.
 The State shall make reasonable efforts to identify and arrange 
 for services described in subparagraph (B). Nothing in this 
 subsection shall be construed as requiring a State (under the 
 State plan or otherwise) to provide all the services specified 
 in such a plan.
 (c) Extended Services Covered Under the State Plan.--
 (1) In general.--The State plan shall include the following 
 extended services:
 (A) Developmentally appropriate personal assistance 
 services that are family centered and provided in a 
 culturally competent manner, and which meet the 
 standards of 2104(g).
 (B) Care management.
 (C) Homemaker and chore assistance.
 (D) Home modifications.
 (E) Respite services.
 (F) Assistive technology devices and assistive 
 technology services as defined in the Technology 
 Related Assistance for Individuals with Disabilities 
 Act.
 (G) Habilitation and rehabilitation.
 (H) Home health services.
 (I) Transportation.
 (J) Any other care or assistive services (approved 
 by the Secretary) that the State determines will help 
 maximize a child's ability to function independently, 
 appropriately, and effectively in an age-appropriate 
 manner, or will facilitate the caregiver's ability to 
 care for the child outside of an institution.
 (2) Criteria for selection of services.--The State plan 
 shall specify--
 (A) the methods and standards used to select the 
 types, and the amount, duration, and scope, of services 
 to be covered under the plan and to be available to 
 eligible children, and
 (B) how the types, and the amount, duration, and 
 scope, of services specified meet the needs of eligible 
 children.
 (d) No Individual Entitlement.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed to create an entitlement for eligible children.
 (e) Exclusions and Limitations.--
 (1) In general.--A State plan may not provide for coverage 
 of--
 (A) room and board,
 (B) services furnished in a hospital, nursing 
 facility, intermediate care facility for the mentally 
 retarded, or other institutional setting specified by 
 the Secretary, or
 (C) items and services for which the child may 
 receive payment under title I or title IV of this Act.
 (f) Payment for Services.--A State plan may provide for the use 
of--
 (1) vouchers,
 (2) cash payments directly to a child's designated 
 representative,
 (3) capitation payments to health plans, and
 (4) payment to providers,
to pay for covered services.

SEC. 2113. CHILDREN ELIGIBLE FOR SERVICES.

 (a) Eligibility Criteria.--
 (1) In general.--Children with special health care needs 
 shall be eligible for extended services and benefits under this 
 subpart.
 (2) Child with special health care needs.--As used in this 
 subpart, the term ``child with special health care needs'' 
 means an individual between the ages of birth to 21 years who--
 (A) is not eligible for medical assistance under 
 title IV of this Act;
 (B) has a significant functional limitation under 
 paragraph (3); and
 (C) is in need of extended services under paragraph 
 (4).
 (3) Significant Functional Limitation.--
 (A) In general.--As used in this subpart, the term 
 ``significant functional limitation'' means--
 (i) in the case of an individual 6 years of 
 age or older, a significant physical or mental 
 impairment as defined pursuant to State policy 
 to the extent that such policy is established 
 without regard to type of disability; and
 (ii) in the case of infants and young 
 children, birth to age 5, inclusive, a 
 substantial developmental delay or specific 
 congenital or acquired conditions with a high 
 probability of resulting in a disability if 
 services are not provided.
 (B) Presumptive significant functional 
 limitation.--An individual who has a disability or who 
 is blind pursuant to the eligibility requirements of 
 title XVI of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1381 et 
 seq.) shall be considered to have--
 (i) in the case of an individual 6 years of 
 age or older, a significant physical or mental 
 impairment as defined pursuant to State policy 
 to the extent that such policy is established 
 without regard to type of disability; and
 (ii) in the case of infants and young 
 children, birth to age 5, inclusive, a 
 substantial developmental delay or specific 
 congenital or acquired conditions with a high 
 probability of resulting in a disability if 
 services are not provided.
 (4) Child in need of extended services.--As used in this 
 subpart, the term ``child in need of extended services'' means 
 an individual between the ages of birth to 21 years of age who 
 requires services identified in section 2112(c) in order to 
 maximize or restore function, or prevent or limit disability.

SEC. 2114. APPLICATION AND ADMINISTRATION.

 (a) Application for State Participation.--
 (1) In general.--A State desiring a grant under this 
 subpart shall submit an application, as an addendum to the 
 State application under section 2102, identifying in the State 
 plan--
 (A) the population to be served under this subpart;
 (B) the manner in which funds made available would 
 be utilized, and the services to be provided;
 (C) how the State will define individuals qualified 
 to develop individualized pediatric plans of care as 
 defined in section 2112(b)(3); and
 (D) how the State will assure that the range of 
 services available under section 2112 will also be 
 available to individuals with disabilities under the 
 age of 21 who are eligible for services under subpart A 
 to the maximum extent possible consistent with funds 
 available to carry out subpart A; and
 (E) any other information the Secretary may 
 require.
 (2) Evaluation of program.--An applicant under this section 
 shall agree to provide an evaluation of the effectiveness, 
 including cost effectiveness when measurable, of offering the 
 benefits and services under the State plan to children with 
 special health care needs.
 (b) Number of Programs.--
 (1) Request for applications.--The Secretary shall publish 
 a request for applications under this section not later than 1 
 year after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) Maximum number of grants.--The Secretary shall make 
 grants available under this subpart for the maximum number of 
 State programs, in accordance with the current funding level in 
 section 2117, that is compatible with services and benefits to 
 be offered under section 2112 for eligible children with 
 special health care needs residing in such State.
 (3) Formula.--The provisions of subsection (b)(2) shall 
 remain in effect through fiscal year 2003, at which time the 
 Secretary shall establish a formula by which to distribute 
 funds under this subpart, in accordance with section 2117, to 
 all States that have a plan approved in accordance with section 
 2111 to provide the benefits described in section 2112.
 (c) Administration.--
 (1) State agency.--The State shall designate a State agency 
 or designee to administer (or to supervise the administration 
 of) the program under this subpart.
 (2) Coordination.--The State agency or designee shall 
 specify how the agency or designee will coordinate its 
 activities with health plans and other service providers, and 
 with the agency administering subpart A.
 (3) Requirement for coordination of care.--The State 
 program under this subpart shall provide for coordinated 
 services and benefits as described in section 2112 to a family 
 with children with special health care needs integrating 
 services whenever possible in accordance with section 
 2102(a)(9)(C).

SEC. 2115. COST-SHARING.

 (a) No Cost Sharing for Poorest.--The State plan may not impose any 
cost sharing for individuals with income (as determined under 
subsection (c)) less than 150 percent of the official poverty level 
(referred to in section 1902(38)(A)) applicable to a family of the size 
involved (determined without regard to section 1902(38)(B)).
 (b) Sliding Scale for Remainder.--The State plan shall impose cost 
sharing in the form of coinsurance (based on the amount paid under the 
State plan for a service)--
 (1) at a rate of 10 percent for individuals with 
 disabilities with income not less than 150 percent, and less 
 than 200 percent, of such official poverty line (as so 
 applied);
 (2) at a rate of 20 percent for such individuals with 
 income not less than 200 percent, and less than 250 percent, of 
 such official poverty line (as so applied); and
 (3) at a rate of 25 percent for such individuals with 
 income equal to at least 250 percent of such official poverty 
 line (as so applied).
 (c) Determination of Income for Purposes of Cost Sharing.--The 
State plan shall specify the process to be used to determine the income 
of an individual with disabilities for purposes of this section. In 
making these income determinations, the State shall at a minimum comply 
with standards established by the Secretary. Such standards shall 
include a uniform Federal definition of income and shall allow 
deductions from income for disability-related expenses not covered 
under other titles of this Act as promulgated by the Secretary.
 (d) Recommendation for Reductions.--The Secretary shall make 
recommendations to the States as how to reduce cost-sharing based on 
income standards established under subsection (c) for individuals with 
extraordinary out of pocket costs for whom the cost-sharing provisions 
of section 2115 could jeopardize their ability to take advantage of the 
services offered under this Act.
 (e) Request for Payment Plan.--If copayments under subsection (b) 
for services utilized by the child pursuant to section 2112(b)(1) 
exceed 10 percent of the child's income or the income of their 
designated representative--
 (1) the child or child's designated representative may 
 request that the State provide a payment schedule for these 
 amounts that shall not exceed 10 percent of monthly income, and
 (2) States may accept such requests from individuals and 
 provide payment plans without interest or finance charges.

SEC. 2116. PROGRAM EVALUATION.

 The Secretary shall evaluate the programs under this subpart, and 
shall submit to Congress interim reports detailing the utilization, 
cost, and cost efficiency of the programs.

SEC. 2117. TOTAL FEDERAL BUDGET AND FEDERAL ALLOTMENT TO STATES.

 (a) Total Federal Budget.--The amount available to carry out State 
plans under this subpart shall be an amount equal to the total of a 2 
percent set-aside from the amounts for each fiscal year beginning in 
fiscal year 1996 pursuant to section 2109.
 (b) Federal Matching Percentage.--States shall contribute to the 
program an amount consistent with the requirements in section 
2108(b)(1).
 (c) Remaining Funds.--Funds remaining under subsection (a) at the 
end of each fiscal year shall be made available to States under section 
2108 for the following fiscal year.

 PART 2--LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE IMPROVEMENT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

SEC. 2201. SHORT TITLE.

 This part may be cited as the ``Long-Term Care Insurance 
Improvement and Accountability Act''.

SEC. 2202. ESTABLISHMENT OF FEDERAL STANDARDS FOR LONG-TERM CARE 
 INSURANCE.

 The Public Health Service Act is amended by adding at the end 
thereof the following new title:

 ``TITLE XXVII--LONG-TERM CARE

 ``PART 1--LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE STANDARDS

 ``Subpart A--Promulgation of Standards and Model Benefits

``SEC. 2701. STANDARDS.

 ``(a) Application of Standards.--
 ``(1) NAIC.--
 ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall request that 
 the National Association of Insurance Commissioners 
 (hereafter in this part referred to as the `NAIC')--
 ``(i) develop specific standards that 
 incorporate the requirements of this part; and
 ``(ii) report to the Secretary concerning 
 such standards.
 ``(B) Application.--If, within 12 months after the 
 date of the enactment of this part, the NAIC develops 
 the model standards under subparagraph (A)(i), the 
 Secretary shall have 60 days in which to determine 
 whether such standards implement the requirements of 
 this part. If such standards are approved by the 
 Secretary, they shall be the standards that apply as 
 provided in this part.
 ``(2) Default.--If the NAIC does not promulgate the model 
 standards under paragraph (1) by the deadline established in 
 that paragraph, the Secretary shall promulgate, within 12 
 months after such deadline, a regulation that provides 
 standards that incorporate the requirements of this part and 
 such standards shall apply as provided for in this part.
 ``(3) Relation to state law.--Nothing in this part shall be 
 construed as preventing a State from applying standards that 
 provide greater protection to policyholders of long-term care 
 insurance policies than the standards promulgated under this 
 part, except that such State standards may not be inconsistent 
 or in conflict with any of the requirements of this part.
 ``(b) Deadline for Application of Standards.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the date 
 specified in this subsection for a State is--
 ``(A) the date the State adopts the standards 
 established under subsection (a)(1); or
 ``(B) the date that is 1 year after the first day 
 of the first regular legislative session that begins 
 after the date such standards are first established 
 under subsection (a)(2);
 whichever is earlier.
 ``(2) State requiring legislation.--In the case of a State 
 which the Secretary identifies, in consultation with the NAIC, 
 as--
 ``(A) requiring State legislation (other than 
 legislation appropriating funds) in order for the 
 standards established under subsection (a) to be 
 applied; but
 ``(B) having a legislature which is not scheduled 
 to meet within 1 year following the beginning of the 
 next regular legislative session in which such 
 legislation may be considered;
 the date specified in this subsection is the first day of the 
 first calendar quarter beginning after the close of the first 
 legislative session of the State legislature that begins on or 
 after January 1, 1995. For purposes of the previous sentence, 
 in the case of a State that has a 2-year legislative session, 
 each year of such session shall be deemed to be a separate 
 regular session of the State legislature.
 ``(c) Items Included in Standards.--The standards promulgated under 
subsection (a) shall include--
 ``(1) minimum Federal standards for long-term care 
 insurance consistent with the provisions of this part;
 ``(2) standards for the enhanced protection of consumers 
 with long-term care insurance; and
 ``(3) procedures for the modification of the standards 
 established under paragraph (1) in a manner consistent with 
 future laws to expand existing Federal or State long-term care 
 benefits or establish a comprehensive Federal or State long-
 term care benefit program.
 ``(d) Consultation.--In establishing standards and models of 
benefits under this section, the Secretary shall, after consultation 
with representatives of carriers, consumer groups, and providers of 
long-term care services--
 ``(1) recommend the appropriate inflationary index to be 
 used with respect to the inflation protection benefit portion 
 of the standards;
 ``(2) recommend the uniform needs assessment mechanism to 
 be used in determining the eligibility of individuals for 
 benefits under a policy;
 ``(3) recommend appropriate standards for the regulation of 
 the insurance aspects of supported housing arrangements; and
 ``(4) perform such other activities as determined 
 appropriate by the Secretary.

 ``Subpart B--Establishment and Implementation of Long-Term Care 
 Insurance Policy Standards

``SEC. 2711. IMPLEMENTATION OF POLICY STANDARDS.

 ``(a) In General.--
 ``(1) Regulatory program.--No long-term care policy (as 
 defined in section (2721)) may be issued, sold, or offered for 
 sale as a long-term care insurance policy in a State on or 
 after the date specified in section 2701(b) unless--
 ``(A) the Secretary determines that the State has 
 established a regulatory program that--
 ``(i) provides for the application and 
 enforcement of the standards established under 
 section 2701(a); and
 ``(ii) complies with the requirements of 
 subsection (b);
 by the date specified in section 2701(b), and the 
 policy has been approved by the State commissioner or 
 superintendent of insurance under such program; or
 ``(B) if the State has not established such a 
 program, or if the State's regulatory program has been 
 decertified, the policy has been certified by the 
 Secretary (in accordance with such procedures as the 
 Secretary may establish) as meeting the standards 
 established under section 2701(a) by the date specified 
 in section 2701(b).
 For purposes of this subsection, the advertising or soliciting 
 with respect to a policy, directly or indirectly, shall be 
 deemed the offering for sale of the policy.
 ``(2) Review of state regulatory programs.--The Secretary 
 shall review regulatory programs described in paragraph (1)(A) 
 at least biannually to determine if they continue to provide 
 for the application and enforcement of the standards and 
 procedures established under section 2701(a) and (b). If the 
 Secretary determines that a State regulatory program no longer 
 meets such standards and requirements, before making a final 
 determination, the Secretary shall provide the State an 
 opportunity to adopt such a plan of correction as would permit 
 the program to continue to meet such standards and 
 requirements. If the Secretary makes a final determination that 
 the State regulatory program, after such an opportunity, fails 
 to meet such standards and requirements, the Secretary shall 
 assume responsibility under paragraph (1)(B) with respect to 
 certifying policies in the State and shall exercise full 
 authority under section 2701 for carriers, agents, or 
 associations or its subsidiary in the State plans in the State.
 ``(b) Additional Requirements for Approval of State Regulatory 
Programs.--For purposes of subsection (a)(1)(A)(ii), the requirements 
of this subsection for a State regulatory program are as follows:
 ``(1) Enforcement.--The enforcement under the program--
 ``(A) shall be designed in a manner so as to secure 
 compliance with the standards within 30 days after the 
 date of a finding of noncompliance with such standards; 
 and
 ``(B) shall provide for notice in the annual report 
 required under paragraph (5) to the Secretary of cases 
 where such compliance is not secured within such 30-day 
 period.
 ``(2) Process.--The enforcement process under each State 
 regulatory program shall provide for--
 ``(A) procedures for individuals and entities to 
 file written, signed complaints respecting alleged 
 violations of the standards;
 ``(B) responding to such complaints within 90 days;
 ``(C) the investigation of--
 ``(i) those complaints which have a 
 reasonable probability of validity, and
 ``(ii) such other alleged violations of the 
 standards as the program finds appropriate; and
 ``(D) the imposition of appropriate sanctions 
 (which include, in appropriate cases, the imposition of 
 a civil money penalty as provided for in section 2718) 
 in the case of a carrier, agent, or association or its 
 subsidiary determined to have violated the standards.
 ``(3) Private actions.--An individual may commence a civil 
 action in an appropriate State or United States district court 
 to enforce the provisions of this title and may be awarded 
 appropriate relief and reasonable attorney's fees.
 ``(4) Consumer access to compliance information.--
 ``(A) In general.--A State regulatory program must 
 provide for consumer access to complaints filed with 
 the State commissioner or superintendent of insurance 
 with respect to long-term care insurance policies.
 ``(B) Confidentiality.--The access provided under 
 subparagraph (A) shall be limited to the extent 
 required to protect the confidentiality of the identity 
 of individual policyholders.
 ``(5) Process for approval of premiums.--
 ``(A) In general.--Each State regulatory program 
 shall--
 ``(i) provide for a process for approving 
 or disapproving proposed premium increases or 
 decreases with respect to long-term care 
 insurance policies; and
 ``(ii) establish a policy for receipt and 
 consideration of public comments before 
 approving such a premium increase or decrease.
 ``(B) Conditions for approval.--No premium increase 
 shall be approved (or deemed approved) under 
 subparagraph (A) unless the proposed increase is 
 accompanied by an actuarial memorandum which--
 ``(i) includes a description of the 
 assumptions that justify the increase, 
 including a financial report on expenditures;
 ``(ii) contains such information as may be 
 required under the Standards; and
 ``(iii) is made available to the public.
 ``(C) Application.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (D), this paragraph shall not apply to a 
 group long-term care insurance policy issued to a group 
 described in section 4(E)(1) of the NAIC Long Term Care 
 Insurance Model Act (effective January 1991), except 
 that such group policy shall, pursuant to guidelines 
 developed by the NAIC, provide notice to policyholders 
 and certificate holders of any premium change under 
 such group policy.
 ``(D) Exception.--Subparagraph (C) shall not apply 
 to--
 ``(i) group conversion policies;
 ``(ii) the group continuation feature of a 
 group policy if the insurer separately rates 
 employee and continuation coverages; and
 ``(iii) group policies where the function 
 of the employer is limited solely to collecting 
 premiums (through payroll deductions or dues 
 checkoff) and remitting them to the insurer.
 ``(E) Construction.--Nothing in this paragraph 
 shall be construed as preventing the NAIC from 
 promulgating standards, or a State from enacting and 
 enforcing laws, with respect to premium rates or loss 
 ratios for all, including group, long-term care 
 insurance policies.
 ``(6) Annual reports.--Each State regulatory program shall 
 provide for annual reports to be submitted to the Secretary on 
 the implementation and enforcement of the standards in the 
 State, including information concerning violations in excess of 
 30 days.
 ``(7) Access to other information.--The State regulatory 
 program must provide for consumer access to actuarial 
 memoranda, including financial information, provided under 
 paragraph (4).
 ``(8) Default.--In the case of a State without a regulatory 
 program approved under subsection (a), the Secretary shall 
 provide for the enforcement activities described in subsection 
 (c).
 ``(c) Secretarial Enforcement Authority.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall exercise authority 
 under this section in the case of a State that does not have a 
 regulatory program approved under this section.
 ``(2) Complaints and investigations.--The Secretary shall 
 establish procedures--
 ``(A) for individuals and entities to file written, 
 signed complaints respecting alleged violations of the 
 requirements of this part;
 ``(B) for responding on a timely basis to such 
 complaints; and
 ``(C) for the investigation of--
 ``(i) those complaints that have a 
 reasonable probability of validity; and
 ``(ii) such other alleged violations of the 
 requirements of this part as the Secretary 
 determines to be appropriate.
 In conducting investigations under this subsection, agents of 
 the Secretary shall have reasonable access necessary to enable 
 such agents to examine evidence of any carrier, agent, or 
 association or its subsidiary being investigated.
 ``(3) Hearings.--
 ``(A) In general.--Prior to imposing an order 
 described in paragraph (4) against a carrier, agent, or 
 association or its subsidiary under this section for a 
 violation of the requirements of this part, the 
 Secretary shall provide the carrier, agent, association 
 or subsidiary with notice and, upon request made within 
 a reasonable time (of not less than 30 days, as 
 established by the Secretary by regulation) of the date 
 of the notice, a hearing respecting the violation.
 ``(B) Conduct of hearing.--Any hearing requested 
 under subparagraph (A) shall be conducted before an 
 administrative law judge. If no hearing is so 
 requested, the Secretary's imposition of the order 
 shall constitute a final and unappealable order.
 ``(C) Authority in hearings.--In conducting 
 hearings under this paragraph--
 ``(i) agents of the Secretary and 
 administrative law judges shall have reasonable 
 access necessary to enable such agents and 
 judges to examine evidence of any carrier, 
 agent, or association or its subsidiary being 
 investigated; and
 ``(ii) administrative law judges, may, if 
 necessary, compel by subpoena the attendance of 
 witnesses and the production of evidence at any 
 designated place or hearing.
 In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena 
 lawfully issued under this subparagraph and upon 
 application of the Secretary, an appropriate district 
 court of the United States may issue an order requiring 
 compliance with such subpoena and any failure to obey 
 such order may be punished by such court as a contempt 
 thereof.
 ``(D) Issuance of orders.--If an administrative law 
 judge determines in a hearing under this paragraph, 
 upon the preponderance of the evidence received, that a 
 carrier, agent, or association or its subsidiary named 
 in the complaint has violated the requirements of this 
 part, the administrative law judge shall state the 
 findings of fact and issue and cause to be served on 
 such carrier, agent, association, or subsidiary an 
 order described in paragraph (4).
 ``(4) Cease and desist order with civil money penalty.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to the provisions of 
 subparagraphs (B) through (F), an order under this 
 paragraph--
 ``(i) shall require the agent, association 
 or its subsidiary, or a carrier--
 ``(I) to cease and desist from such 
 violations; and
 ``(II) to pay a civil penalty in an 
 amount not to exceed $15,000 in the 
 case of each agent, and not to exceed 
 $25,000 for each association or its 
 subsidiary or a carrier for each such 
 violation; and
 ``(ii) may require the agent, association 
 or its subsidiary, or a carrier to take such 
 other remedial action as is appropriate.
 ``(B) Corrections within 30 days.--No order shall 
 be imposed under this paragraph by reason of any 
 violation if the carrier, agent, or association or its 
 subsidiary establishes to the satisfaction of the 
 Secretary that--
 ``(i) such violation was due to reasonable 
 cause and was not intentional and was not due 
 to willful neglect; and
 ``(ii) such violation is corrected within 
 the 30-day period beginning on the earliest 
 date the carrier, agent, association, or 
 subsidiary knew, or exercising reasonable 
 diligence could have known, that such a 
 violation was occurring.
 ``(C) Waiver by secretary.--In the case of a 
 violation under this part that is due to reasonable 
 cause and not to willful neglect, the Secretary may 
 waive part or all of the civil money penalty imposed 
 under subparagraph (A)(i)(II) to the extent that 
 payment of such penalty would be grossly excessive 
 relative to the violation involved and to the need for 
 deterrence of violations.
 ``(D) Administrative appellate review.--The 
 decision and order of an administrative law judge under 
 this paragraph shall become the final agency decision 
 and order of the Secretary unless, within 30 days, the 
 Secretary modifies or vacates the decision and order, 
 in which case the decision and order of the Secretary 
 shall become a final order under this paragraph.
 ``(E) Judicial review.--A carrier, agent, or 
 association or its subsidiary or any other individual 
 adversely affected by a final order issued under this 
 paragraph may, within 45 days after the date the final 
 order is issued, file a petition in the Court of 
 Appeals for the appropriate circuit for review of the 
 order.
 ``(F) Enforcement of orders.--If a carrier, agent, 
 or association or its subsidiary fails to comply with a 
 final order issued under this paragraph against the 
 carrier, agent, association or subsidiary after 
 opportunity for judicial review under subparagraph (E), 
 the Secretary shall file a suit to seek compliance with 
 the order in any appropriate district court of the 
 United States. In any such suit, the validity and 
 appropriateness of the final order shall not be subject 
 to review.

``SEC. 2712. REGULATION OF SALES PRACTICES.

 ``(a) Duty of Good Faith and Fair Dealing.--
 ``(1) In general.--Each agent (as defined in section 2733) 
 or association that is selling or offering for sale a long-term 
 care insurance policy has the duty of good faith and fair 
 dealing to the purchaser or potential purchaser of such a 
 policy.
 ``(2) Policy replacement form.--With respect to any person 
 who elects to replace or effect a change in a long-term care 
 insurance policy, the individual that is selling such policy 
 shall ensure that such person completes a policy replacement 
 form developed by the NAIC. A copy of such form shall be 
 provided to such person and additional copies shall be 
 delivered by the selling individual to the old policy issuer 
 and the new issuer and kept on file for inspection by the State 
 regulatory agency.
 ``(3) Prohibited practices.--An agent or association is 
 considered to have violated paragraph (1) if the agent or 
 association engages in any of the following practices:
 ``(A) Twisting.--Knowingly making any misleading 
 representation (including the inaccurate completion of 
 medical histories) or incomplete or fraudulent 
 comparison of any long-term care insurance policy or 
 insurers for the purpose of inducing, or tending to 
 induce, any person to retain or effect a change with 
 respect to a long-term care insurance policy.
 ``(B) High pressure tactics.--Employing any method 
 of marketing having the effect of, or intending to, 
 induce the purchase of long-term care insurance policy 
 through force, fright, threat or undue pressure, 
 whether explicit or implicit.
 ``(C) Cold lead advertising.--Making use directly 
 or indirectly of any method of marketing which fails to 
 disclose in a conspicuous manner that a purpose of the 
 method of marketing is solicitation of insurance and 
 that contact will be made by an insurance agent or 
 insurance company.
 ``(D) Others.--Engaging in such other practices 
 determined inappropriate under guidelines issued by the 
 NAIC.
 ``(b) Financial Standards.--The NAIC shall develop recommended 
financial minimum standards (including both income and asset criteria) 
for the purpose of advising individuals as to the costs and amounts of 
insurance needed when considering the purchase of a long-term care 
insurance policy.
 ``(c) Prohibition of Sale or Issuance to Medicaid Beneficiaries.--
An agent, an association, or a carrier may not knowingly sell or issue 
a long-term care insurance policy to an individual who is eligible for 
medical assistance under title XIX of the Social Security Act.
 ``(d) Prohibition of Sale or Issuance of Duplicate Service Benefit 
Policies.--An agent, association or its subsidiary, or a carrier may 
not sell or issue a service-benefit long-term care insurance policy to 
an individual--
 ``(1) knowing that the policy provides for coverage that 
 duplicates coverage already provided in another service-benefit 
 long-term care insurance policy held by such individual (unless 
 the policy is intended to replace such other policy); or
 ``(2) for the benefit of an individual unless the 
 individual (or a representative of the individual) provides a 
 written statement to the effect that the coverage--
 ``(A) does not duplicate other coverage in effect 
 under a service-benefit long-term care insurance 
 policy; or
 ``(B) will replace another service-benefit long-
 term care insurance policy.
In this subsection, the term `service-benefit long-term care insurance 
policy' means a long-term care insurance policy which provides for 
benefits based on the type and amount of services furnished.
 ``(e) Prohibition Based on Eligibility for Other Benefits.--A 
carrier may not sell or issue a long-term care insurance policy that 
reduces, limits or coordinates the benefits provided under the policy 
on the basis that the policyholder has or is eligible for other long-
term care insurance coverage or benefits.
 ``(f) Provision of Outline of Coverage.--No agent, association or 
its subsidiary, or carrier may sell or offer for a sale a long-term 
care insurance policy without providing to every individual purchaser 
or potential purchaser (or representative) an outline of coverage that 
complies with the standards established under section 2701(a).
 ``(g) Penalties.--Any agent who sells, offers for sale, or issues a 
long-term care insurance policy in violation of this section may be 
imprisoned not more than 5 years, or fined in accordance with title 18, 
United States Code, and, in addition, is subject to a civil money 
penalty of not to exceed $15,000 for each such violation. Any 
association or its subsidiary or carrier that sells, offers for sale, 
or issues a long-term care insurance policy in violation of this 
section may be fined in accordance with title 18, United States Code, 
and in addition, is subject to a civil money penalty of not to exceed 
$25,000 for each violation. Nothing in this subsection shall be 
construed as preempting or otherwise limiting the penalties that may be 
imposed by a State for conduct that violates this section.
 ``(h) Agent Training and Certification Requirements.--The NAIC, 
shall establish requirements for long-term care insurance agent 
training and certification that--
 ``(1) specify requirements for training insurance agents 
 who desire to sell or offer for sale long-term care insurance 
 policies; and
 ``(2) specify procedures for certifying and recertifying 
 agents who have completed such training and who are as 
 qualified to sell or offer for sale long-term care insurance 
 policies.

``SEC. 2713. ADDITIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES FOR CARRIERS.

 ``(a) Refund of Premiums.--If an application for a long-term care 
insurance policy (or for a certificate under a group long-term care 
insurance policy) is denied or an applicant returns a policy or 
certificate within 30 days of the date of its issuance pursuant to 
subsection 2717, the carrier shall refund directly to the applicant, or 
in the case of an employer to whomever remits the premium, and not by 
delivery by the agent, not later than 30 days after the date of the 
denial or return, any premiums paid with respect to such a policy (or 
certificate).
 ``(b) Mailing of Policy.--If an application for a long-term care 
insurance policy (or for a certificate under a group long-term care 
insurance policy) is approved, the carrier shall provide every 
individual applicant the policy (or certificate) of insurance and 
outline of coverage not later than 30 days after the date of the 
approval.
 ``(c) Information on Denials of Claims.--If a claim under a long-
term care insurance policy is denied, the carrier shall, within 15 days 
of the date of a written request by the policyholder or certificate 
holder (or representative)--
 ``(1) provide a written explanation of the reasons for the 
 denial;
 ``(2) make available all medical and patient records 
 directly relating to such denial; and
 ``(3) provide a written explanation of the manner in which 
 to appeal the denial.
Except as provided in subsection (e) of section 2715, no claim under 
such a policy may be denied on the basis of a failure to disclose a 
condition at the time of issuance of the policy if the application for 
the policy failed to request information respecting the condition.
 ``(d) Reporting of Information.--A carrier that issues one or more 
long-term care insurance policies shall periodically (not less often 
than annually) report, in a form and in a manner determined by the 
NAIC, to the Commissioner, superintendent or director of insurance of 
each State in which the policy is delivered, and shall make available 
to the Secretary, upon request, information in a form and manner 
determined by the NAIC concerning--
 ``(1) the long-term care insurance policies of the carrier 
 that are in force;
 ``(2) the most recent premiums for such policies and the 
 premiums imposed for such policies since their initial 
 issuance;
 ``(3) the lapse rate, replacement rate, and rescission 
 rates by policy;
 ``(4) the names of that 10 percent of its agents that--
 ``(A) have the greatest lapse and replacement rate; 
 and
 ``(B) have produced at least $50,000 of long-term 
 care insurance sales in the previous year; and
 ``(5) the claims denied (expressed as a number and as a 
 percentage of claims submitted) by policy.
Information required under this subsection shall be reported in a 
format specified in the standards established under section 2701(a). 
For purposes of paragraph (3), there shall be included (but reported 
separately) data concerning lapses due to the death of the 
policyholder. For purposes of paragraph (4), there shall not be 
included as a claim any claim that is denied solely because of the 
failure to meet a deductible, waiting period, or exclusionary period.
 ``(e) Standards on Compensation for Sale of Policies.--
 ``(1) In general.--A carrier that issues one or more long-
 term care insurance policies may provide a commission or other 
 compensation to an agent or other representative for the sale 
 of such a policy only if the first year commission or other 
 first year compensation to be paid does not exceed 200 percent 
 of the commission or other compensation paid for selling or 
 servicing the policy in the second year, or if the first year 
 commission or other compensation to be paid does not exceed 50 
 percent of the premium paid on the first year policy, until the 
 NAIC promulgates mandatory standards concerning compensation 
 for the sale of such policies.
 ``(2) Subsequent years.--The commission or other 
 compensation provided for the sale of long-term care insurance 
 policies in years subsequent to the first year of the policy 
 shall be the same as that provided in the second subsequent 
 year and shall be provided for no fewer than 5 subsequent 
 years.
 ``(3) Limitation.--No carrier shall provide compensation to 
 its agents for the sale of a long-term care insurance policy 
 and no agent shall receive compensation greater than the 
 renewal compensation payable by the replacing carrier on 
 renewal policies if an existing policy is replaced.
 ``(4) Compensation defined.--As used in this subsection, 
 the term `compensation' includes pecuniary or nonpecuniary 
 remuneration of any kind relating to the sale or renewal of the 
 policy, including but not limited to deferred compensation, 
 bonuses, gifts, prizes, awards, and finders fees.

``SEC. 2714. RENEWABILITY STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE, AND BASIC FOR 
 CANCELLATION OF POLICIES.

 ``(a) In General.--No long-term care insurance policy may be 
canceled or nonrenewed for any reason other than nonpayment of premium, 
material misrepresentation or fraud.
 ``(b) Continuation and Conversion Rights for Group Policies.--
 ``(1) In general.--Each group long-term care insurance 
 policy shall provide covered individuals with a basis for 
 continuation or conversion in accordance with this subsection.
 ``(2) Basis for continuation.--For purposes of paragraph 
 (1), a policy provides a basis for continuation of coverage if 
 the policy maintains coverage under the existing group policy 
 when such coverage would otherwise terminate and which is 
 subject only to the continued timely payment of premium when 
 due. A group policy which restricts provision of benefits and 
 services to or contains incentives to use certain providers or 
 facility, may provide continuation benefits which are 
 substantially equivalent to the benefits of the existing group 
 policy.
 ``(3) Basis for conversion.--For purposes of paragraph (1), 
 a policy provides a basis for conversion of coverage if the 
 policy entitles each individual--
 ``(A) whose coverage under the group policy would 
 otherwise be terminated for any reason; and
 ``(B) who has been continuously insured under the 
 policy (or group policy which was replaced) for at 
 least 6 months before the date of the termination;
 to issuance of a policy providing benefits identical to, 
 substantially equivalent to, or in excess of, those of the 
 policy being terminated, without evidence of insurability.
 ``(4) Treatment of substantial equivalence.--In determining 
 under this subsection whether benefits are substantially 
 equivalent, consideration should be given to the difference 
 between managed care and non-managed care plans.
 ``(5) Group replacement of policies.--If a group long-term 
 care insurance policy is replaced by another long-term care 
 insurance policy purchased by the same policyholder, the 
 succeeding issuer shall offer coverage to all persons covered 
 under the old group policy on its date of termination. Coverage 
 under the new group policy shall not result in any exclusion 
 for preexisting conditions that would have been covered under 
 the group policy being replaced.
 ``(c) Standards for Issuance.--
 ``(1) In general.--
 ``(A) Guarantee.--An agent, association or carrier 
 that sells or issues long-term care insurance policies 
 shall guarantee that such policies shall be sold or 
 issued to an individual, or eligible individual in the 
 case of a group plan, if such individual meets the 
 minimum medical underwriting requirements of such 
 policy.
 ``(B) Premium for converted policy.--If a group 
 policy from which conversion is made is a replacement 
 for a previous group policy, the premium for the 
 converted policy shall be calculated on the basis of 
 the insured's age at the inception of coverage under 
 the group policy from which conversion is made. Where 
 the group policy from which conversion is made replaced 
 previous group coverage, the premium for the converted 
 policy shall be calculated on the basis of the 
 insured's age at inception of coverage under the group 
 policy replaced.
 ``(2) Upgrade for current policies.--The NAIC shall 
 establish standards, including those providing guidance on 
 medical underwriting and age rating, with respect to the access 
 of individuals to policies offering upgraded benefits.
 ``(3) Rate stabilization.--The NAIC shall establish 
 standards for premium rate stabilization.
 ``(d) Effect of Incapacitation.--
 ``(1) In general.--
 ``(A) Prohibition.--Except as provided in paragraph 
 (2), a long-term care insurance policy in effect as of 
 the effective date of the standards established under 
 section 2701(a) may not be canceled for nonpayment if 
 the policy holder is determined by a long-term care 
 provider, physician or other health care provider, 
 independent of the issuer of the policy, to be 
 cognitively or mentally incapacitated so as to not make 
 payments in a timely manner.
 ``(B) Reinstatement.--A long-term care policy shall 
 include a provision that provides for the reinstatement 
 of such coverage, in the event of lapse, if the insurer 
 is provided with proof of cognitive or mental 
 incapacitation. Such reinstatement option shall remain 
 available for a period of not less than 5 months after 
 termination and shall allow for the collection of past 
 due premium.
 ``(2) Permitted cancellation.--A long-term care insurance 
 policy may be canceled under paragraph (1) for nonpayment if--
 ``(A) the period of such nonpayment is in excess of 
 30 days; and
 ``(B) notice of intent to cancel is provided to the 
 policyholder or designated representative of the policy 
 holder not less than 30 days prior to such 
 cancellation, except that notice may not be provided 
 until the expiration of 30 days after a premium is due 
 and unpaid.
 Notice under this paragraph shall be deemed to have been given 
 as of 5 days after the mailing date.

``SEC. 2715. BENEFIT STANDARDS.

 ``(a) Use of Standard Definitions and Terminology, Uniform Format, 
and Standard Benefits.--Each long-term care insurance policy shall, 
with respect to services, providers or facilities, pursuant to 
standards established under section 2701(a)--
 ``(1) use uniform language and definitions, except that 
 such language and definitions may take into account the 
 differences between States with respect to definitions and 
 terminology used for long-term care services and providers; and
 ``(2) use a uniform format for presenting the outline of 
 coverage under such a policy;
as prescribed under guidelines issued by the NAIC and periodically 
updated.
 ``(b) Disclosure.--
 ``(1) Outline of coverage.--
 ``(A) Requirement.--Each carrier that sells or 
 offers for sale a long-term care insurance policy shall 
 provide an outline of coverage to each individual 
 policyholder under such policy that meets the 
 applicable standards established pursuant to section 
 2701(a), complies with the requirements of subparagraph 
 (B), and is in a uniform format as prescribed in 
 guidelines issued by the NAIC and periodically updated.
 ``(B) Contents.--The outline of coverage for each 
 long-term care insurance policy shall include at least 
 the following:
 ``(i) A description of the benefits and 
 coverage under the policy.
 ``(ii) A statement of the exclusions, 
 reductions, and limitations contained in the 
 policy.
 ``(iii) A statement of the terms under 
 which the policy (or certificate) may be 
 continued in force or discontinued, the terms 
 for continuation or conversion, and any 
 reservation in the policy of a right to change 
 premiums.
 ``(iv) Consumer protection information, 
 including the manner in which to file a claim 
 and to register complaints.
 ``(v) A statement, in bold face type on the 
 face of the document in language that is 
 understandable to an average individual, that 
 the outline of coverage is a summary only, not 
 a contract of insurance, and that the policy 
 (or master policy) contains the contractual 
 provisions that govern, except that such 
 summary shall substantially and accurately 
 reflect the contents of the policy or the 
 master policy.
 ``(vi) A description of the terms, 
 specified in section 2717, under which a policy 
 or certificate may be returned and premium 
 refunded.
 ``(vii) Information on--
 ``(I) national average costs for 
 nursing facility and home health care 
 and information (in graphic form) on 
 the relationship of the value of the 
 benefits provided under the policy to 
 such national average costs and State 
 average costs; and
 ``(II) other public and private 
 long-term care insurance products and 
 long-term care programs where made 
 available by the Federal Government or 
 by a State government.
 ``(viii) A statement of the percentage 
 limit on annual premium increases that is 
 provided under the policy pursuant to this 
 section.
 ``(2) Certificates.--A certificate issued pursuant to a 
 group long-term care insurance policy shall include--
 ``(A) a description of the principal benefits and 
 coverage provided in the policy;
 ``(B) a statement of the principal exclusions, 
 reductions, and limitations contained in the policy; 
 and
 ``(C) a statement that the group master policy 
 determines governing contractual provisions.
 ``(3) Long-term care as part of life insurance.--In the 
 case of a long-term care insurance policy issued as a part of, 
 or a rider on, a life insurance policy, at the time of policy 
 delivery there shall be provided a policy summary that 
 includes--
 ``(A) an explanation of how the long-term care 
 benefits interact with other components of the policy 
 (including deductions from death benefits);
 ``(B) an illustration of the amount of benefits, 
 the length of benefit, and the guaranteed lifetime 
 benefits (if any) for each covered person; and
 ``(C) any exclusions, reductions, and limitations 
 on benefits of long-term care.
 ``(4) Additional information.--The NAIC shall develop 
 recommendations with respect to informing consumers of the 
 long-term economic viability of carriers issuing long-term care 
 insurance policies.
 ``(c) Limiting Conditions on Benefits; Minimum Benefits.--
 ``(1) In general.--A long-term care insurance policy may 
 not condition or limit eligibility--
 ``(A) for benefits for a type of services to the 
 need for or receipt of any other services;
 ``(B) for any benefit on the medical necessity for 
 such benefit;
 ``(C) for benefits furnished by licensed or 
 certified providers in compliance with conditions which 
 are in addition to those required for licensure or 
 certification under State law, except that if no State 
 licensure or certification laws exists, in compliance 
 with qualifications developed by the NAIC; or
 ``(D) for residential care (if covered under the 
 policy) only--
 ``(i) to care provided in facilities which 
 provide a higher level of care; or
 ``(ii) to care provided in facilities which 
 provide for 24-hour or other nursing care not 
 required in order to be licensed by the State.
 ``(2) Home health care or community-based services.--If a 
 long-term care insurance policy provides benefits for the 
 payment of specified home health care or community-based 
 services, the policy--
 ``(A) may not limit such benefits to services 
 provided by registered nurses or licensed practical 
 nurses;
 ``(B) may not require benefits for such services to 
 be provided by a nurse or therapist that can be 
 provided by a home health aide or licensed or certified 
 home care worker, except that if no State licensure or 
 certification laws exists, in compliance with 
 qualifications developed by the NAIC;
 ``(C) may not limit such benefits to services 
 provided by agencies or providers certified under title 
 XVIII of the Social Security Act; and
 ``(D) must provide, at a minimum, benefits for 
 personal care services (including home health aide and 
 home care worker services as defined by the NAIC) home 
 health services, adult day care, and respite care in an 
 individual's home or in another setting in the 
 community, or any of these benefits on a respite care 
 basis.
 ``(3) Nursing facility services.--If a long-term care 
 insurance policy provides benefits for the payment of specified 
 nursing facility services, the policy must provide such 
 benefits with respect to all nursing facilities (as defined in 
 section 1919(a) of the Social Security Act or until such time 
 as subsequently provided for by the NAIC in establishing 
 uniform language and definitions under section 2715(a)(1)) in 
 the State.
 ``(4) Per diem policies.--
 ``(A) Definition.--For purposes of this part, the 
 term `per diem long-term care insurance policy' means a 
 long-term care insurance policy (or certificate under a 
 group long-term care insurance policy) that provides 
 for benefit payments on a periodic basis due to 
 cognitive impairment or loss of functional capacity 
 without regard to the expenses incurred or services 
 rendered during the period to which the payments 
 relate.
 ``(B) Limitation.--No per diem long-term care 
 insurance policy (or certificate) may condition, limit 
 or otherwise exclude benefit payments based on the 
 receipt of any type services from any type providers of 
 long-term care service providers.
 ``(d) Prohibition of Discrimination.--A long-term care insurance 
policy may not treat benefits under the policy in the case of an 
individual with Alzheimer's disease, with any related progressive 
degenerative dementia of an organic origin, with any organic or 
inorganic mental illness, or with mental retardation or any other 
cognitive or mental impairment differently from an individual having a 
functional impairment for which benefits may be made available.
 ``(e) Limitation on Use of Preexisting Condition Limits.--
 ``(1) Initial issuance.--
 ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), a 
 long-term care insurance policy may not exclude or 
 condition benefits based on a medical condition for 
 which the policyholder received treatment or was 
 otherwise diagnosed before the issuance of the policy.
 ``(B) 6-month limit.--
 ``(i) In general.--No long-term care 
 insurance policy or certificate issued under 
 this part shall utilize a definition of 
 `preexisting condition' that is more 
 restrictive than the following: The term 
 `preexisting condition' means a condition for 
 which medical advice or treatment was 
 recommended by, or received from a provider of 
 health care services, within 6 months preceding 
 the effective date of coverage of an insured 
 individual.
 ``(ii) Prohibition on exclusion of 
 coverage.--No long-term care insurance policy 
 or certificate may exclude coverage for a loss 
 or confinement that is the result of a 
 preexisting condition unless such loss or 
 confinement begins within 6 months following 
 the effective date of the coverage of the 
 insured individual.
 ``(2) Replacement policies.--If a long-term care insurance 
 policy replaces another long-term care insurance policy, the 
 issuer of the replacing policy shall waive any time periods 
 applicable to preexisting conditions, waiting period, 
 elimination periods and probationary periods in the new policy 
 for similar benefits to the extent such time was spent under 
 the original policy.
 ``(f) Eligibility for Benefits.--
 ``(1) Long-term care policies.--Each long-term care 
 insurance policy shall--
 ``(A) describe the level of benefits available 
 under the policy; and
 ``(B) specify in clear, understandable terms, the 
 level (or levels) of physical, cognitive, or mental 
 impairment required in order to receive benefits under 
 the policy.
 ``(2) Functional assessment.--In order to submit a claim 
 under any long-term care insurance policy, each claimant shall 
 have a professional functional assessment of his or her 
 functional or cognitive abilities. Such initial assessment 
 shall be conducted by an individual or entity, meeting the 
 qualifications established by the NAIC to assure the 
 professional competence and credibility of such individual or 
 entity and that such individual meets any applicable State 
 licensure and certification requirements. The individual or 
 entity conducting such assessment may not control, or be 
 controlled by, the issuer of the policy. For purposes of this 
 paragraph and paragraph (4), the term `control' means the 
 direct or indirect possession of the power to direct the 
 management and policies of a person. Control is presumed to 
 exist, if any person directly or indirectly, owns, controls, 
 holds with the power to vote, or holds proxies representing at 
 least 10 percent of the voting securities of another person.
 ``(3) Claims review.--Except as provided in paragraph (1), 
 each long-term care insurance policy shall be subject to final 
 claims review by the carrier pursuant to the terms of the long-
 term care insurance policy.
 ``(4) Appeals process.--
 ``(A) In general.--Each long-term care insurance 
 policy shall provide for a timely and independent 
 appeals process, meeting standards established by the 
 NAIC, for individuals who dispute the results of the 
 claims review, conducted under paragraph (3), of the 
 policyholder's functional assessment, conducted under 
 paragraph (2).
 ``(B) Independent assessment.--An appeals process 
 under this paragraph shall include, at the request of 
 the claimant, an independent assessment of the 
 claimant's functional or cognitive abilities.
 ``(C) Conduct.--An independent assessment under 
 subparagraph (B) shall be conducted by an individual or 
 entity meeting the qualifications established by the 
 NAIC to assure the professional competence and 
 credibility of such individual or entity and any 
 applicable State licensure and certification 
 requirements and may not be conducted--
 ``(i) by an individual who has a direct or 
 indirect significant or controlling interest 
 in, or direct affiliation or relationship with, 
 the issuer of the policy;
 ``(ii) by an entity that provides services 
 to the policyholder or certificate holder for 
 which benefits are available under the long-
 term care insurance policy; or
 ``(iii) by an individual or entity in 
 control of, or controlled by, the issuer of the 
 policy.
 ``(5) Standard assessments.--Not later than 2 years after 
 the date of enactment of this part, the advisory committee 
 established under section 2701(d) shall recommend uniform needs 
 assessment mechanisms for the determination of eligibility for 
 benefits under such assessments.
 ``(g) Inflation Protection.--
 ``(1) Option to purchase.--A carrier may not offer a long-
 term care insurance policy unless the carrier also offers to 
 the proposed policyholder, including each group policyholder, 
 the option to purchase a policy that provides for increases in 
 benefit levels, with benefit maximums or reasonable durations 
 that are meaningful, to account for reasonably anticipated 
 increases in the costs of long-term care services covered by 
 the policy. A carrier may not offer to a policyholder an 
 inflation protection feature that is less favorable to the 
 policyholder than one following:
 ``(A) With respect to policies that provide for 
 automatic periodic increases in benefits, the policy 
 provides for an annual increase in benefits in a manner 
 so that such increases are computed annually at a rate 
 of not less than 5 percent.
 ``(B) With respect to policies that provide for 
 periodic opportunities to elect an increase in 
 benefits, the policy guarantees that the insured 
 individual will have the right to periodically increase 
 the benefit levels under the policy without providing 
 evidence of insurability or health status so long as 
 the option for the previous period was not declined. 
 The amount of any such additional benefit may not be 
 less than the difference between--
 ``(i) the existing policy benefit; and
 ``(ii) such existing benefit compounded 
 annually at a rate of at least 5 percent for 
 the period beginning on the date on which the 
 existing benefit is purchased and extending 
 until the year in which the offer of increase 
 is made.
 ``(C) With respect to service benefit policies, the 
 policy covers a specified percentage of the actual or 
 reasonable charges and does not include a maximum 
 specified indemnity amount or limit.
 ``(2) Exception.--The requirements of paragraph (1) shall 
 not apply to life insurance policies or riders containing 
 accelerated long-term care benefits.
 ``(3) Required information.--Carriers shall include the 
 following information in or together with the outline of 
 coverage provided under this part:
 ``(A) A graphic comparison of the benefit levels of 
 a policy that increases benefits over the policy period 
 with a policy that does not increase benefits. Such 
 comparison shall show benefit levels over not less than 
 a 20-year period.
 ``(B) Any expected premium increases or additional 
 premiums required to pay for any automatic or optional 
 benefit increases, whether the individual who purchases 
 the policy obtains the inflation protection initially 
 or whether such individual delays purchasing such 
 protection until a future time.
 ``(4) Continuation of protection.--Inflation protection 
 benefit increases under this subsection under a policy that 
 contains such protection shall continue without regard to an 
 insured's age, claim status or claim history, or the length of 
 time the individual has been insured under the policy.
 ``(5) Constant premium.--An offer of inflation protection 
 under this subsection that provides for automatic benefit 
 increases shall include an offer of a premium that the carrier 
 expects to remain constant. Such offer shall disclose in a 
 conspicuous manner that the premium may change in the future 
 unless the premium is guaranteed to remain constant.
 ``(6) Rejection.--Inflation protection under this 
 subsection shall be included in a long-term care insurance 
 policy unless a carrier obtains a written rejection of such 
 protection signed by the policyholder.

``SEC. 2716. NONFORFEITURE.

 ``(a) In General.--Each long-term care insurance policy (or 
certificate) shall provide that if the policy lapses after the policy 
has been in effect for a minimum period (specified under the standards 
under section 2701(a)), the policy will provide, without payment of any 
additional premiums, nonforfeiture benefits as determined appropriate 
by the NAIC.
 ``(b) Establishment of Standards.--The standards under section 
2701(a) shall provide that the percentage or amount of benefits under 
subsection (a) must increase based upon the policyholder's equity in 
the policy.

``SEC. 2717. LIMIT OF PERIOD OF CONTESTABILITY AND RIGHT TO RETURN.

 ``(a) Contestability.--A carrier may not cancel or renew a long-
term care insurance policy or deny a claim under the policy based on 
fraud or intentional misrepresentation relating to the issuance of the 
policy unless notice of such fraud or misrepresentation is provided 
within a time period to be determined by the NAIC.
 ``(b) Right to Return.--Each applicant for a long-term care 
insurance policy shall have the right to return the policy (or 
certificates) within 30 days of the date of its delivery (and to have 
the premium refunded) if, after examination of the policy or 
certificate, the applicant is not satisfied for any reason.

``SEC. 2718. CIVIL MONEY PENALTY.

 ``(a) Carrier.--Any carrier, association or its subsidiary that 
sells or offers for sale a long-term care insurance policy and that--
 ``(1) fails to make a refund in accordance with section 
 2713(a);
 ``(2) fails to transmit a policy in accordance with section 
 2713(b);
 ``(3) fails to provide, make available, or report 
 information in accordance with subsections (c) or (d) of 
 section 2713;
 ``(4) provides a commission or compensation in violation of 
 section 2713(e);
 ``(5) fails to provide an outline of coverage in violation 
 of section 2715(b)(1); or
 ``(6) issues a policy without obtaining certain information 
 in violation of section 2715(f);
is subject to a civil money penalty of not to exceed $25,000 for each 
such violation.
 ``(b) Agents.--Any agent that sells or offers for sale a long-term 
care insurance policy and that--
 ``(1) fails to make a refund in accordance with section 
 2713(a);
 ``(2) fails to transmit a policy in accordance with section 
 2713(b);
 ``(3) fails to provide, make available, or report 
 information in accordance with subsections (c) or (d) of 
 section 2713;
 ``(4) fails to provide an outline of coverage in violation 
 of section 2715(b)(1); or
 ``(5) issues a policy without obtaining certain information 
 in violation of section 2715(f);
is subject to a civil money penalty of not to exceed $15,000 for each 
such violation.
 ``(c) Effect on State Law.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed as preempting or otherwise limiting the penalties that may be 
imposed by a State for the types of conduct described in this section.

 ``Subpart C--Long-Term Care Insurance Policies, Definition and 
 Endorsements

``SEC. 2721. LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE POLICY DEFINED.

 ``(a) In General.--As used in this section, the term `long-term 
care insurance policy' means any insurance policy, rider or certificate 
advertised, marketed, offered or designed to provide coverage for not 
less than 12 consecutive months for each covered person on an expense 
incurred, indemnity prepaid or other basis, for one or more necessary 
diagnostic, preventive, therapeutic, rehabilitative, maintenance or 
personal care services, provided in a setting other than an acute care 
unit of a hospital. Such term includes--
 ``(1) group and individual annuities and life insurance 
 policies, riders or certificates that provide directly, or that 
 supplement long-term care insurance; and
 ``(2) a policy, rider or certificates that provides for 
 payment of benefits based on cognitive impairment or the loss 
 of functional capacity.
 ``(b) Issuance.--Long-term care insurance policies may be issued 
by--
 ``(1) carriers;
 ``(2) fraternal benefit societies;
 ``(3) nonprofit health, hospital, and medical service 
 corporations;
 ``(4) prepaid health plans;
 ``(5) health maintenance organizations; or
 ``(6) any similar organization to the extent they are 
 otherwise authorized to issue life or health insurance.
 ``(c) Policies Excluded.--The term `long-term care insurance 
policy' shall not include any insurance policy, rider or certificate 
that is offered primarily to provide basic Medicare supplement 
coverage, basic hospital expense coverage, basic medical-surgical 
expense coverage, hospital confinement indemnity coverage, major 
medical expense coverage, disability income or related asset-protection 
coverage, accident only coverage, specified disease or specified 
accident coverage, or limited benefit health coverage. With respect to 
life insurance, such term shall not include life insurance policies, 
riders or certificates that accelerate the death benefit specifically 
for one or more of the qualifying events of terminal illness, medical 
conditions requiring extraordinary medical intervention, or permanent 
institutional confinement, and that provide the option of a lump-sum 
payment for those benefits and in which neither the benefits nor the 
eligibility for the benefits is conditioned upon the receipt of long-
term care.
 ``(d) Applications.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this 
part, this part shall apply to any product advertised, marketed or 
offered as a long-term insurance policy, rider or certificate.

``SEC. 2722. CODE OF CONDUCT WITH RESPECT TO ENDORSEMENTS.

 ``Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this part 
the NAIC shall issue guidelines that shall apply to organizations and 
associations, other than employers and labor organizations that do not 
accept compensation, and their subsidiaries that provide endorsements 
of long-term care insurance policies, or that permit such policies to 
be offered for sale through the organization or association. Such 
guidelines shall include at minimum the following:
 ``(1) In endorsing or selling long-term care insurance 
 policies, the primary responsibility of an organization or 
 association shall be to educate their members concerning such 
 policies and assist such members in making informed decisions. 
 Such organizations and associations may not function primarily 
 as sales agents for insurance companies.
 ``(2) Organizations and associations shall provide 
 objective information regarding long-term care insurance 
 policies sold or endorsed by such organizations and 
 associations to ensure that members of such organizations and 
 associations have a balanced and complete understanding of both 
 the strengths and weaknesses of the policies that are being 
 endorsed or sold.
 ``(3) Organizations and associations selling or endorsing 
 long-term care insurance policies shall disclose in marketing 
 literature provided to their members concerning such policies 
 the manner in which such policies and the insurance company 
 issuing such policies were selected. If the organization or 
 association and the insurance company have interlocking 
 directorates, the organization or association shall disclose 
 such fact to their members.
 ``(4) Organizations and associations selling or endorsing 
 long-term care insurance policies shall disclose in marketing 
 literature provided to their members concerning such policies 
 the nature and amount of the compensation arrangements 
 (including all fees, commissions, administrative fees and other 
 forms of financial support that the organization or association 
 receives) from the endorsement or sale of the policy to its 
 members.
 ``(5) The Boards of Directors of organizations and 
 associations selling or endorsing long-term care insurance 
 policies, if such organizations and associations have a Board 
 of Directors, shall review and approve such insurance policies, 
 the compensation arrangements and the marketing materials used 
 to promote sales of such policies.''.

 PART 3--LIFE CARE

SEC. 2301. SHORT TITLE.

 This part may be cited as the ``Life Care Act''.

SEC. 2302. LIFE CARE: PUBLIC INSURANCE PROGRAM FOR NURSING HOME CARE.

 Title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act (as added by section 
2301) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new part:

 ``PART 2--LIFE CARE: PUBLIC INSURANCE PROGRAM FOR NURSING HOME CARE

``SEC. 2741. ESTABLISHMENT OF VOLUNTARY LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE 
 PROGRAM.

 ``The Secretary shall establish a voluntary insurance program for 
individuals 35 years of age and over to cover the nursing home stays of 
such individuals. The Secretary shall establish a process for 
enrollment in the Life Care program.

``SEC. 2742. BENEFITS.

 ``(a) In General.--
 ``(1) Eligibility for coverage.--Subject to subsection (c), 
 an individual who meets the eligibility criteria prescribed in 
 section 2743 shall be eligible under the program established 
 under this part for coverage for necessary services described 
 in subsection (b) (in the amounts described in subsection (c)) 
 that are provided to the individual by a nursing facility while 
 the individual is an inpatient of the facility.
 ``(2) Nonforfeiture.--The Secretary shall establish 
 standards to ensure the nonforfeiture of benefits for which 
 premiums have been paid.
 ``(b) Types.--Coverage may be provided under this part for--
 ``(1) nursing care provided by or under the supervision of 
 a registered professional nurse;
 ``(2) physical, occupational, or speech therapy furnished 
 by a facility or by others under arrangements with a facility;
 ``(3) medical social work services;
 ``(4) drug, biological, supply, appliance, and equipment 
 for use in the facility, that is ordinarily furnished by the 
 facility for the care and treatment of an inpatient;
 ``(5) such other services necessary to the functioning of a 
 patient, including personal care and assistance with activities 
 of daily living, as are generally provided by a nursing home 
 facility; and
 ``(6) with respect to the initial 6 months of covered 
 residence in a nursing facility, such room and board costs as 
 are not covered by beneficiary copayment.
 ``(c) Coverage Amount.--
 ``(1) In general.--The amount of coverage provided with 
 respect to an eligible individual for the services described in 
 subsection (b) shall, based on an election made by the 
 individual, not exceed $30,000, $60,000, or $90,000 over the 
 lifetime of the eligible individual. Such amounts shall be 
 adjusted by the Secretary to reflect increases in the Consumer 
 Price Index.
 ``(2) Asset protection.--An eligible individual shall be 
 entitled to the asset protection provided under section 2748.
 ``(d) Payment.--Amounts provided under this part with respect to an 
eligible individual for the services described in subsection (b) shall 
be paid from the general fund of the Treasury of the United States.
 ``(e) Residential Care Facilities.--The Secretary shall consider 
the feasibility of making payments under this part for services 
delivered in residential care facilities. Not later than 2 years after 
the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall report its 
findings to the Congress with respect to the feasibility of making such 
payments.

``SEC. 2743. ELIGIBILITY.

 ``(a) In General.--An individual shall be eligible for benefits 
under this part if--
 ``(1) the individual--
 ``(A) is a legal resident of the United States and 
 has elected coverage under subsection (c); and
 ``(B) has been determined by a Screening Agency 
 through a screening process (conducted in accordance 
 with section 2747)--
 ``(i)(I) to require hands-on or standby 
 assistance, supervision, or cueing (as defined 
 in regulations) to perform three or more 
 activities of daily living; or
 ``(II) to require hands-on or standby 
 assistance, supervision, or cueing with at 
 least such instrumental activity (or 
 activities) of daily living related to 
 cognitive or mental impairment as the Secretary 
 specifies; or
 ``(III) to display symptoms of one or more 
 serious behavioral problems (that is on a list 
 of such problems specified by the Secretary) 
 which create a need for supervision to prevent 
 harm to self or others; or
 ``(IV) has achieved a score, on a standard 
 mental status protocol (or protocols) 
 appropriate for measuring the individual's 
 particular condition specified by the 
 Secretary, that indicates either severe 
 cognitive impairment or severe mental 
 impairment, or both; and
 ``(ii) to require such assistance, 
 supervision, or cueing over a period of at 
 least 90 days; and
 ``(2)(A) the individual has filed an application for such 
 benefits, and is in need of, benefits covered under this part; 
 or
 ``(B) the legal guardian of the individual has filed an 
 application on behalf of an individual who is in need of 
 benefits covered under this part; or
 ``(C) the representative of an individual who is 
 cognitively impaired and who is in need of benefits covered 
 under this part has filed an application on behalf of the 
 individual.
 ``(b) Current Individuals.--An individual who is in a hospital or 
nursing home on the date of the enrollment of the individual in the 
program established under this part shall be ineligible for coverage 
under this section until the individual's first spell of illness 
beginning after such date.
 ``(c) Election of Coverage.--
 ``(1) In general.--Subject to this subsection, an 
 individual shall have the option to purchase coverage under 
 this part when the individual is 35 years of age, 45 years of 
 age, 55 years of age, or 65 years of age.
 ``(2) Initial year.--During the 1-year period beginning on 
 the date on which final regulations that implement this part 
 are issued, an individual who is 35 years of age or older shall 
 be eligible to purchase insurance under this part, except that 
 such an individual shall not be eligible to purchase such 
 insurance--
 ``(A) while confined to a hospital or nursing home;
 ``(B) within the 6-month period after the 
 individual's confinement in a nursing home; or
 ``(C) within the 90-day period after the 
 individual's confinement in a hospital.
 Individuals described in the matter preceding subparagraph (A) 
 shall become eligible to receive benefits under this part on 
 the expiration of the 3-year period beginning on the date such 
 individuals purchase insurance under this part.
 ``(3) Extension beyond initial year.--If an individual is 
 confined to a nursing home or hospital during a period that 
 extends beyond the first year after the effective date of this 
 part, an individual shall be eligible to enroll in the program 
 established by this part during the 60-day period beginning 
 after the individual's spell of illness.
 ``(4) Subsequent years.--During years subsequent to the 1-
 year period referred to in paragraph (2), an individual shall 
 be eligible to purchase insurance under this part within 6 
 months of the 35th, 45th, 55th or 65th birthday of the 
 individual.
 ``(5) Activation of benefits.--To receive coverage under 
 the insurance program established by this part, an individual 
 shall have purchased such coverage not later than 1 month prior 
 to admission to a nursing facility, unless the reason for the 
 need of services is a result of an accident or stroke 
 subsequent to the date that such individual enrolled for 
 coverage under this part.
 ``(d) Public Education.--In the 12 months preceding the initial 
enrollment period, the Secretary shall, either directly or through 
grants and contracts, conduct a public service and education campaign 
designed to inform potentially eligible individuals as to the nature of 
the benefits and the limited enrollment period. In conducting such 
campaigns the Secretary shall make information available to individuals 
through the open enrollment process for obtaining health care benefits 
under this Act.

``SEC. 2744. PREMIUM RATES.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall determine one premium rate 
for individuals electing to purchase coverage under this part at age 35 
(or between the ages of 35 and 44 during the initial enrollment 
period), a separate rate for those individuals who elect coverage at 
age 45 (or between the ages of 45 and 54 during the initial enrollment 
period), a separate rate for those individuals who elect such coverage 
at age 55 (or between that ages of 55 and 64 during the initial 
enrollment period), and a separate rate for those individuals who elect 
such coverage at age 65 (or at age 65 and over during the initial 
enrollment period). During the initial enrollment period, the Secretary 
shall establish actuarily fair, age-rated premiums for persons age 65 
and over.
 ``(b) Revision.--The Secretary shall revise premium rates annually 
to increase such rates to reflect the amount of the increase in the 
cost of living adjustment with respect to benefits under title II of 
the Social Security Act.
 ``(c) Rates.--In developing premium rates under the program 
established under this part, the Secretary shall establish rates that 
are expected to cover 100 percent of the reimbursement amount provided 
under this part for nursing home stays for those individuals enrolled 
in the program.
 ``(d) Waiver.--An individual electing to purchase coverage under 
this part shall not be required to pay premiums during any period in 
which such individual is receiving benefits under this part.
 ``(e) Payment.--Premiums shall be paid under this section into the 
general fund of the Treasury of the United States.

``SEC. 2745. QUALIFIED SERVICE PROVIDERS.

 ``(a) In General.--To be considered as a covered nursing home 
service under this part, such service must have been provided by a 
qualified service provider.
 ``(b) Types.--A provider shall be considered a qualified service 
provider under this part if the provider is a nursing facility that is 
certified by the State and meets the requirements of this part and any 
other standards established by the Secretary by regulation for the safe 
and efficient provision of services covered under this part.

``SEC. 2746. REIMBURSEMENT.

 ``(a) Amount.--Monthly reimbursement for nursing facility services 
under this part shall equal 65 percent (or during the initial 6 months 
of coverage, 80 percent) of the amount the Secretary determines to be 
reasonable and appropriate to cover the cost of care provided under 
this part.
 ``(b) Prospective Payment.--To the extent feasible, the Secretary 
shall establish a prospective payment mechanism for payment for nursing 
home services under this part that takes into account the expected 
resource utilization of individual patients based on their degree of 
disability, the methodology recommended for reimbursement of skilled 
nursing facilities under title XVIII of the Social Security Act, and 
other factors determining service requirements.
 ``(c) Room and Board Payment.--An individual receiving benefits 
under this program shall be responsible for the payment of an amount 
for room and board that is equal to--
 ``(1) with respect to the initial 6 months of residence in 
 a nursing facility, 20 percent of the average per diem rate 
 paid by the Secretary to nursing facilities receiving 
 reimbursement under this part; and
 ``(2) with respect to subsequent periods of residence, 35 
 percent of the average per diem rate paid by the Secretary to 
 nursing facilities receiving reimbursement under this part. 
 Payments under subsection (a) and (c) shall be considered 
 payment in full for services received under this section.
 ``(d) Priority Payers.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this 
part, reimbursement for nursing facility services provided under this 
part to an individual shall, to the extent available, be made under the 
Medicare program, under Department of Veterans Affairs' programs, or 
under private insurance policies prior to reimbursement under this 
part.

``SEC. 2747. LONG-TERM CARE SCREENING AGENCY.

 ``(a) Establishment.--The Secretary shall contract with entities to 
act as Long-Term Care Screening Agencies (hereafter referred to in this 
part as the `Screening Agency') for each designated area of a State. It 
shall be the responsibility of such agency to assess the eligibility of 
individuals residing in the geographic jurisdiction of the Agency, for 
services provided under this part according to the requirements of this 
part and regulations prescribed by the Secretary. In entering into such 
contracts, the Secretary shall give preference to State governmental 
entities and private nonprofit agencies.
 ``(b) Eligibility.--The Screening Agency shall determine the 
eligibility of an individual under this part based on the results of a 
preliminary telephone interview or written questionnaire (completed by 
the applicant, by the caregiver of the applicant, or by the legal 
guardian or representative of the applicant) that shall be validated 
through the use of a screening tool administered in person to each 
applicant determined eligible through initial telephone or written 
questionnaire interviews not later than 15 days from the date on which 
such individual initially applied for services under this part.
 ``(c) Questionnaires and Screening Tools.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish a 
 telephone or written questionnaire and a screening tool to be 
 used by the Screening Agency to determine the eligibility of an 
 individual for services under this part consistent with 
 requirements of this part and the standards established by the 
 Secretary by regulation.
 ``(2) Questionnaires.--The questionnaire shall include 
 questions about the functional impairment and mental status of 
 an individual and other criteria that the Secretary shall 
 prescribe by regulation.
 ``(3) Screening tools.--The screening tool should measure 
 functional impairment caused by physical or cognitive 
 conditions as well as information concerning cognition 
 disability, behavioral problems (such as wandering or abusive 
 and aggressive behavior), and any other criteria that the 
 Secretary shall prescribe by regulation. The screening tool 
 shall be administered in person.
 ``(d) Notification.--Not later than 15 days after the date on which 
an individual initially applied for services under this part (by 
telephone or written questionnaire), the Screening Agency shall notify 
such individual that such individual is not eligible for benefits, or 
that such individuals must schedule an in-person screening to determine 
final eligibility for benefits under this part. The Screening Agency 
shall notify such individual of its final decision not later than 2 
working days after the in-person screening.
 ``(e) In-Person Screening.--An individual (or the legal guardian or 
representative of such individual) whose application for benefits under 
this part is denied on the basis of information provided through a 
telephone or written questionnaire, shall be notified of such 
individual's right to an in-person screening by a nurse or appropriate 
health care professionals.
 ``(f) Appeals.--The Secretary shall establish a mechanism for 
hearings and appeals in cases in which individuals contest the 
eligibility findings of the Screening Agency.
 ``(g) Payment.--
 ``(1) Payment for screening.--The Screening Agency may 
 require payment from individuals only in accordance with 
 standards established by the Secretary.
 ``(2) No payment for poorest.--The Screening Agency may not 
 require payment for individuals with incomes of less than 150 
 percent of the official poverty line.

``SEC. 2748. ASSET PROTECTION.

 ``Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the assets an 
eligible individual may retain and be determined eligible for nursing 
facility benefits, including payments of room and board under this 
part, under State Medicaid programs (in accordance with section 
1902(a)(10)) shall be increased by the amount of coverage ($30,000, 
$60,000, or $90,000) elected under section 2742.

``SEC. 2749. RELATION TO PRIVATE INSURANCE.

 ``(a) In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), an insurer 
may not offer a long-term care insurance policy to an individual who 
has purchased coverage under this part if the coverage under such 
policy duplicates the coverage provided under this part.
 ``(b) Development of Standard Packages.--The Secretary shall 
develop standard long-term care insurance benefits packages that 
insurers may offer to insured individuals under this part. Such 
packages shall provide coverage for benefits that compliment, but do 
not duplicate, those covered under this part.

``SEC. 2750. DEFINITIONS.

 ``As used in this part:
 ``(1) Nursing facility.--The term `nursing facility' 
 means--
 ``(A) a skilled nursing facility (as defined in 
 section 1819(a) of the Social Security Act); or
 ``(B) a facility that is a nursing facility (as 
 defined in section 1919(a) of such Act) which meets the 
 requirements of section 1819(b)(4)(C) of such Act 
 (relating to nursing care).
 ``(2) Spell of illness.--The term `spell of illness' means 
 a period of consecutive days beginning with the first day on 
 which an individual is furnished services as an inpatient in a 
 hospital or nursing facility and ending with the close of the 
 first 6 consecutive months thereafter during which the 
 individual is no longer an inpatient of a nursing facility, or 
 90 days after the individual is no longer an inpatient in a 
 hospital.

``SEC. 2751. REPORTS.

 ``(a) In General.--Prior to the promulgation of regulations 
implementing this title, the Secretary shall report to Congress on--
 ``(1) the actuarially-sound premium rates to be used in the 
 implementation of this Act, including whether the premiums will 
 cover 100 percent of the benefits paid out, and whether Federal 
 funds will be required to support the payment of benefits;
 ``(2) an assessment of the impact of such premium rates on 
 the affordability of coverage under this Act;
 ``(3) a projected enrollment of individuals by age 
 category; and
 ``(4) an estimate of current and projected enrollment of 
 individuals, by age category in coverage under private long-
 term care insurance.
 ``(b) Life Care Report.--Not later than 2 years after the 
promulgation of regulations implementing this title, the Secretary 
shall report to Congress on the following aspects of the Life Care Act:
 ``(1) The current and projected premium rates.
 ``(2) The current and projected enrollment of individuals, 
 by age category and an estimate of current and projected 
 enrollment of individuals by age category in private long-term 
 care insurance.
 ``(3) The projected use of benefits and the impact of use 
 on premium rates.
 ``(4) An assessment of the impact of projected premium 
 rates on the affordability of coverage under this Act.
 ``(c) Recommendations.--The Secretary shall make recommendations to 
Congress regarding necessary revisions to the Life Care Act as a result 
of the findings provided in the reports submitted under this 
section.''.

SEC. 2303. SENSE OF THE COMMITTEE CONCERNING PACE (PROGRAM OF ALL-
 INCLUSIVE CARE FOR THE ELDERLY).

 (a) Findings.--The Committee on Labor and Human Resources of the 
Senate finds that--
 (1) a serious shortcoming in the Nation's current health 
 care delivery system is its ability to integrate acute and 
 long-term care services;
 (2) the pioneering efforts of the On Lok program in San 
 Francisco, which has been replicated as PACE (Program of All-
 inclusive Care for the Elderly), provides a comprehensive range 
 of acute and long-term care services to frail, nursing home 
 eligible individuals, allowing them to avoid unwanted 
 institutionalization;
 (3) two of the current PACE sites are located in East 
 Boston, Massachusetts and Columbia, South Carolina;
 (4) these programs have done a remarkable job in keeping 
 elderly, low-income, severely disabled individuals in their 
 homes and have proven to be both popular and cost-effective;
 (5) payments to PACE providers are capitated and, 
 therefore, require waivers of Medicare and Medicaid rules; and
 (6) at the present time, only 15 PACE sites are authorized.
 (b) Sense of the Committee.--It is the sense of the Committee on 
Labor and Human Resources of the Senate that--
 (1) the number of PACE sites should be expanded 
 substantially; and
 (2) the Committee on Finance of the Senate, which has 
 jurisdiction over Medicare and Medicaid, should take action on 
 this critical issue to allow a greater number of individuals 
 with disabilities to take advantage of a successful model for 
 integrated service delivery.

 TITLE III--PUBLIC HEALTH INITIATIVES

 Subtitle A--Workforce Priorities Under Federal Payments

 Part 1--Institutional Costs of Graduate Medical Education; Workforce 
 subpart a--national council regarding workforce priorities
Sec. 3001subpart b--authorized positions in specialty training
Sec. 3011. Cooperation regarding approved physician training programs.
Sec. 3012. Annual authorization of number of specialty positions; 
 requirements regarding primary health care.
Sec. 3013. Alsubpart c--costs of graduate medical education
 Chapter 1--Operation of Approved Physician Training Programs

Sec. 3031. Federal formula payments to qualified entities for the costs 
 of the operation of approved physician 
 training programs.
Sec. 3032. Application for payments.
Sec. 3033. Availability of funds for payments; annual amount of 
 payments.
 Chapter 2--Medical School Fund Account

Sec. 3041. Federal payments to the medical school fund.
Sec. 3042. Application for payments.
Sec. 3043. Availability of funds for payments; annual amount of 
 payments.
 Chapter 3--Academic Health Centers

Sec. 3051. Federal formula payments to academic health centers.
Sec. 3052. Request for payments.
Sec. 3053. Availability of funds for payments; annual amount of 
 subpart d--general provisions
Sec. 3055. Definitisubpart e--transitional provisions
Sec. 3061. Transitional payments to institutions.
 Part 2--Institutional Costs of Graduate Nursing Education; Workforce 
 Priorities

Sec. 3071. Authorized graduate nurse training positions; institutional 
 costs.
Sec. 3072. Applicability of part 1 provisions.
 subpart a--workforce development
Sec. 3081. Programs of the secretary of health and human services.
Sec. 3082. Programs of the secretary of labor.
Sec. 3083. Requirement for certain programs regarding redeployment of 
 subpart b--transitional provisions for workforce provisions
Sec. 3091. Application.
Sec. 3092. Definitions.
Sec. 3093. Obligations of displacing employer and affiliated 
 enterprises in event of displacement.
Sec. 3094. Employment with successors.
Sec. 3095. Collective bargaining obligations during transition period.
Sec. 3096. General provisions.
 Subtitle B--Academic Health Centers

Sec. 3131. Discretionary grants regarding access to centers.
 Subtitle C--Health Research Initiatives

 Part 1--Programs for Certain Agencies

Sec. 3201. Biomedical and behavioral research.
Sec. 3202. Health services research.
 Part 2--Funding for Program

Sec. 3211. Authorizations of appropriations.
 Subtitle D--Core Functions of Public Health Programs; National 
 Initiatives Regarding Preventive Health

 Part 1--Funding

Sec. 3301. Authorizations of appropriations.
 Part 2--Core Functions of Public Health Programs

Sec. 3311. Purposes.
Sec. 3312. Grants to States for core functions of public health.
Sec. 3313. Submission of information.
Sec. 3314. Reports.
Sec. 3315. Application for grant.
Sec. 3316. Allocations for certain activities.
Sec. 3317. Definitions.
Sec. 3318. Single application and uniform reporting systems for core 
 functions of public health and public 
 health categorical grant programs 
 administered by the Centers for Disease 
 Control and Prevention.
 Part 3--National Initiatives Regarding Health Promotion and Disease 
 subpart a--general grants
Sec. 3331. Grants for national prevention initiatives.
Sec. 3332. Priorities.
Sec. 3333. Submission of information.
Secsubpart b--development of telemedicine on rural underserved areas
Sec. 3341. Grants for development of rural telemedicine.
Sec. 3342. Report and evaluation of telemedicine.
Sec. 3343. Recommendation on reimbursement of telemedicine.
 Subtitle E--Health Services for Medically Underserved Populations

 Pasubpart a--authorization of appropriationse
subpart b--development of community health groups and health care sites 
 and services
Sec. 3421. Grants and contracts for development of plans and networks 
 and the expansion and development of health 
 care sites and services.
Sec. 3422. Certain uses of awards.
Sec. 3423. Application.
Ssubpart c--capital cost of development of community health groups and 
 other purposes
Sec. 3441. Direct loans and grants.
Sec. 3442. Certain requirements.
Sec. 3443. Defaults; right of recovery.
Sec. 3444. Provisions regarding construction or expansion of 
 facilities.
Sec. 3445. Application for assistance.
Sec. 3446. Adsubpart d--enabling and supplemental services
Sec. 3461. Grants and contracts for enabling and supplemental services.
Sec. 3462. Authorizations of appropriations.
 Part 2--National Health Service Corps

Sec. 3471. Authorizations of appropriations.
Sec. 3472. Allocation for participation of nurses in scholarship and 
 loan repayment programs.
Sec. 3473. Allocation for participation of psychiatrists, 
 psychologists, and clinical social workers 
 in scholarship and loan repayment programs.
 Part 3--Payments to Hospitals Serving Vulnerable Populations

Sec. 3481. Payments to hospitals.
Sec. 3482. Identification of eligible hospitals.
Sec. 3483. Amount of payments.
Sec. 3484. Base year.
 Part 4--Sense of the Committee

Sec. 3491. Sense of the Committee.
 Subtitle F--Mental Health; Substance Abuse

 Part 1--Authoritsubpart a--reportticipating States
Sec. 3511. Report on integration of mental health systems.
Sec. 3512. Reports during transition period.
Part 2--Assistance for State Managed Mental Health and Substance Abuse 
 Programs

Sec. 3531. Availability of assistance.
Sec. 3532. Plan requirements.
Sec. 3533. Additional Federal responsibilities.
Sec. 3534. Authorization of appropriations.
 Subtitle G--Comprehensive School Health Education; School-Related 
 Health Services

 Part 1--Healthy Students-Healthy Schools Grants for School Health 
 Education

Sec. 3601. Purposes.
Sec. 3602. Healthy students-health schools.
Sec. 3603. Healthy students-healthy schools interagency task force.
Sec. 3604. Duties of the secretary.
 Psubpart a--development and operations
Sec. 3681. Authorizations of appropriations.
Sec. 3682. Eligibility for grants.
Sec. 3683. Preferences.
Sec. 3684. Planning and development grants.
Sec. 3685. Gsubpart b--capital costs of developing projects
Sec. 3691. Loans and loan guarantees regarding projects.
Sec. 3692. Funding.
 Subtitle H--Public Health Service Initiative

Sec. 3695. Public health service initiative.
 Subtitle I--Additional Provisions Regarding Public Health

Sec. 3901. Curriculum development and implementation regarding domestic 
 violence and women's health.
 Subtitle J--Occupational Safety and Health

Sec. 3903. Occupational injury and illness prevention.
 Subtitle K--Full funding for WIC

Sec. 3905. Full funding of WIC.
 Subtitle L--Border Health Improvement

Sec. 3908. Border health commission.

 Subtitle A--Workforce Priorities Under Federal Payments

 PART 1--INSTITUTIONAL COSTS OF GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION; WORKFORCE 
 PRIORITIES

 Subpart A--National Council Regarding Workforce Priorities

SEC. 3001. NATIONAL COUNCIL ON GRADUATE MEDICAL EDUCATION.

 (a) In General.--There is established within the Department of 
Health and Human Services a council to be known as the National Council 
on Graduate Medical Education.
 (b) Duties.--The Secretary shall carry out subpart B acting through 
the National Council.
 (c) Composition.--
 (1) In general.--The membership of the National Council 
 shall include between 12 and 18 individuals who are appointed 
 to the Council from among individuals who are not officers or 
 employees of the United States. Such individuals shall be 
 appointed by the Secretary, and shall include individuals from 
 each of the following categories:
 (A) Consumers of health care services, at least one 
 of whom resides in a rural area.
 (B) Physicians who are faculty members of medical 
 schools.
 (C) Physicians in private practice who are not 
 physicians described in subparagraph (B).
 (D) Officers or employees of regional and corporate 
 health alliances.
 (E) Officers or employees of health care plans that 
 participate in such alliances.
 (F) Executives of teaching hospitals.
 (G) Nurses.
 (H) Primary care physicians, at least one of whom 
 practices in a rural area.
 (I) Such other individuals as the Secretary 
 determines to be appropriate.
 (2) Ex officio members; other federal officers or 
 employees.--The membership of the National Council shall 
 include individuals designated by the Secretary to serve as 
 members of the Council from among Federal officers or employees 
 who are appointed by the President, or by the Secretary or 
 other Federal officers who are appointed by the President with 
 the advice and consent of the Senate.
 (d) Chair.--The Secretary shall, from among members of the National 
Council appointed under subsection (c)(1), designate an individual to 
serve as the Chair of the Council.
 (e) Definitions.--For purposes of this subtitle:
 (1) The term ``academic health center'' means an entity 
 defined in section 3051(c)(1).
 (2) The term ``medical school'' means a school of medicine 
 (as defined in section 799 of the Public Health Service Act) or 
 a school of osteopathic medicine (as defined in such section).
 (3) The term ``National Council'' means the council 
 established in subsection (a).

 Subpart B--Authorized Positions in Specialty Training

SEC. 3011. COOPERATION REGARDING APPROVED PHYSICIAN TRAINING PROGRAMS.

 (a) In General.--With respect to an approved physician training 
program in a medical specialty, a funding agreement with a qualified 
applicant for payments under section 3031 for a calendar year is that 
the qualified applicant will ensure that the number of individuals 
enrolled in the program in the subsequent academic year is in 
accordance with this subpart.
 (b) Definitions.--
 (1) Approved program.--For purposes of this subtitle:
 (A) The term ``approved physician training 
 program'', with respect to the medical speciality 
 involved, means a residency or other postgraduate 
 program that trains physicians and meets the following 
 conditions:
 (i) Participation in the program may be 
 counted toward certification in the medical 
 specialty.
 (ii) The program is accredited by the 
 Accreditation Council on Graduate Medical 
 Education, or approved by the Council on 
 Postgraduate Training of the American 
 Osteopathic Association.
 (B) The term ``approved physician training 
 program'' includes any postgraduate program described 
 in subparagraph (A) that provides health services in an 
 ambulatory setting, without regard to whether the 
 program provides inpatient hospital services.
 (C) The term ``approved physician training 
 program'' includes any postgraduate program described 
 in subparagraph (A), whether operated by academic 
 health centers, teaching hospitals, multispecialty 
 group practices, ambulatory care providers, prepaid 
 health plans, or other entities.
 (D) The term ``approved physician training 
 program'' includes any postgraduate program described 
 in subparagraph (A) that provides fellowship training 
 in family medicine, general internal medicine or 
 general pediatrics, and provides training for a faculty 
 position in family medicine, general medicine or 
 general pediatrics.
 (2) Qualified applicant; subpart definition.--For purposes 
 of this subpart, the term ``qualified applicant'', with respect 
 to an academic year, means an entity that trains individuals in 
 an approved physician program that receives payments under 
 subpart C for the calendar year in which the academic year 
 begins.
 (3) Other definitions.--For purposes of this subtitle:
 (A)(i) The term ``academic year'' means the 1-year 
 period beginning on July 1. The academic year beginning 
 July 1, 1993, is academic year 1993-94.
 (ii) With respect to the funding agreement 
 described in subsection (a), the term ``subsequent 
 academic year'' means the academic year beginning July 
 1 of the calendar year for which payments are to be 
 made under the agreement.
 (B) The term ``funding agreement'', with respect to 
 payments under section 3031 to a qualified applicant, 
 means that the Secretary may make the payments only if 
 the qualified applicant makes the agreement involved.
 (C) The term ``medical specialty'' includes all 
 medical, surgical, and other physician specialties and 
 subspecialties.

SEC. 3012. ANNUAL AUTHORIZATION OF NUMBER OF SPECIALTY POSITIONS; 
 REQUIREMENTS REGARDING PRIMARY HEALTH CARE.

 (a) Annual Authorization of Number of Positions.--In the case of 
each medical specialty, the National Council shall, pursuant to section 
3011, designate for each academic year the number of individuals 
nationwide who are authorized to be enrolled in eligible programs. The 
preceding sentence is subject to subsection (c)(2).
 (b) Primary Health Care.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), in carrying out 
 subsection (a) for an academic year, the National Council shall 
 ensure that, of the class of training participants entering 
 eligible programs for academic year 2000-2001 or any subsequent 
 academic year, the percentage of such class that completes 
 eligible programs in primary health care is not less than 55 
 percent (without regard to the academic year in which the 
 members of the class complete the programs).
 (2) Rule of construction.--The requirement of paragraph (1) 
 regarding a percentage applies in the aggregate to training 
 participants entering eligible programs for the academic year 
 involved, and not individually to any eligible program.
 (c) Designations Regarding 3-Year Periods.--
 (1) Designation periods.--For each medical specialty, the 
 National Council shall make the annual designations under 
 subsection (a) for periods of 3 academic years.
 (2) Initial period.--The first designation period 
 established by the National Council after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act shall be the academic years 2000-2001 
 through 2002-03.
 (d) Certain Considerations in Designating Annual Numbers.--
 (1) In general.--Factors considered by the National Council 
 in designating the annual number of specialty positions for an 
 academic year for a medical specialty shall include the extent 
 to which there is a need for additional practitioners in the 
 speciality, as indicated by the following:
 (A) The characteristics of diseases, disorders, or 
 health conditions treated, including--
 (i) the incidence and prevalence (in the 
 general population and in various other 
 populations) of the diseases, disorders, or 
 other health conditions with which the 
 specialty is concerned;
 (ii) the intensity of care required for 
 each of these diseases, disorders, or health 
 conditions;
 (iii) the relevant training received and 
 experience attained by primary care and 
 specialist physicians in caring for each of 
 these diseases, disorders, or health 
 conditions; and
 (iv) when sufficient data becomes 
 available, the extent to which individuals with 
 certain diseases, disorders, or health 
 conditions have better health outcomes when 
 treated by health specialists than by primary 
 care physicians.
 (B) The number of physicians who will be practicing 
 in the specialty in the academic year.
 (C) The number of physicians who will be practicing 
 in the specialty at the end of the 5-year period 
 beginning on the first day of the academic year.
 (2) Recommendations of private organizations.--In 
 designating the annual number of specialty positions for an 
 academic year for a medical specialty, the National Council 
 shall consider the recommendations of organizations 
 representing physicians in the specialty, organizations 
 representing academic medicine, and the recommendations of 
 organizations representing consumers of the services of such 
 physicians.
 (3) Total of respective annual numbers.--
 (A) For academic year 2000-2001 and subsequent 
 academic years, the National Council shall ensure that 
 the total of the respective annual numbers designated 
 under subsection (a) for an academic year is a total 
 that--
 (i) bears a relationship to the number of 
 individuals who graduated from medical schools 
 in the United States in the preceding academic 
 year; and
 (ii) is consistent with the purposes of 
 this subpart.
 (B) For each of the academic years 2000-2001 
 through 2004-05, the total determined under 
 subparagraph (A) shall be reduced by a percentage 
 determined by the National Council.
 (e) Interim Voluntary Targets.--
 (1) Establishment.--Not later than July 1, 1996, the 
 National Council shall establish targets with respect to the 
 aggregate number of individuals enrolled in approved physician 
 training programs for each specialty to be achieved by the year 
 2000.
 (2) Voluntary compliance.--Specialties that meet and 
 continue to be in compliance with the aggregate targets 
 established under paragraph (1), as determined by the National 
 Council, shall not be subject to the mandatory allocation 
 system described in section 3013.
 (3) Measure of compliance.--To be considered in compliance 
 with the targets under paragraph (2), a specialty shall 
 demonstrate, not later than July 1, 1998, that the number of 
 individuals enrolled in approved physician training programs of 
 the specialty is not less than the number of individuals 
 enrolled in such programs as of July 1, 1994, increased or 
 decreased, as the case may be, by 45 percent of the difference 
 between such enrollment and the target enrollment established 
 under paragraph (1) and, not later than January 1, 2000, have 
 increased or decreased by 90 percent of such difference, and, 
 by January 1, 2001, are deemed by the National Council to be in 
 compliance with the target.
 (4) Loss of compliance.--The National Council may, at any 
 time, determine that a specialty is not in compliance with the 
 targets established under paragraph (1) and initiate, with 
 respect to that specialty, the system of mandatory allocations 
 described under section 3013.
 (f) Study.--Not later than January 1, 2005, the Secretary shall 
arrange for the completion, by the Institute of Medicine or other 
similar entity, of an independent study concerning the effect of 
medical workforce regulation and planning. The results of such study 
together with recommendations concerning the appropriateness of 
modifying or eliminating workforce regulations shall be compiled in a 
report and transmitted by the Secretary to the President and the 
Congress.
 (g) Definitions.--For purposes of this subtitle:
 (1) The term ``annual number of specialty positions'', with 
 respect to a medical specialty, means the number designated by 
 the National Council under subsection (a) for eligible programs 
 for the academic year involved.
 (2) The term ``designation period'' means a 3-year period 
 under subsection (c)(1) for which designations under subsection 
 (a) are made by the National Council.
 (3) The term ``primary health care'' means the following 
 medical specialties: Family medicine, general internal 
 medicine, general pediatrics, geriatric medicine, obstetrics 
 and gynecology, and medical specialties (including psychiatry), 
 if any, that have been designated to be medical shortage 
 specialties or protected medical specialties by the Council on 
 Graduate Medical Education, or other similar physician advisory 
 body authorized by Congress to provide an ongoing assessment of 
 physician workforce trends, and identify needs and be advisory 
 to the Secretary, the Committee on Labor and Human Resources 
 and the Committee on Finance of the Senate and the Committee on 
 Energy and Commerce and the Committee on Ways and Means of the 
 House of Representatives. Only those participants in programs 
 with a significant primary care training emphasis will be 
 considered to have completed an eligible program in primary 
 care for the purposes of subsection (b)(1). Determination of 
 meeting the definition of a ``significant primary care training 
 emphasis'' will be made by the National Board.
 (4) The term ``specialty position'' means a position as a 
 training participant.
 (5) The term ``training participant'' means an individual 
 who is enrolled in an approved physician training program.

SEC. 3013. ALLOCATIONS AMONG SPECIALITIES AND PROGRAMS.

 (a) In General.--For each academic year, the National Council shall 
for each medical specialty make allocations among eligible programs of 
the annual number of specialty positions that the Council has 
designated for such year. The preceding sentence is subject to 
subsection (b)(3).
 (b) Allocations Regarding 3-Year Period.--
 (1) In general.--For each medical specialty, the National 
 Council shall make the annual allocations under subsection (a) 
 for periods of 3 academic years.
 (2) Advance notice to programs.--With respect to the first 
 academic year of an allocation period established by the 
 National Council, the National Council shall, not later than 
 July 1 of the preceding academic year, notify each eligible 
 program of the allocations made for the program for each of the 
 academic years of the period.
 (3) Initial period.--The first allocation period 
 established by the National Council after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act shall be the academic years 2000-2001 
 through 2002-03.
 (c) Certain Considerations.--
 (1) Geographic areas; quality of programs.--In making 
 allocations under subsection (a) for eligible programs of the 
 various geographic areas, the National Council shall include 
 among the factors considered the historical distribution among 
 the areas of approved physician training programs, and the 
 quality of such programs.
 (2) Underrepresentation of minority groups and women.--In 
 making an allocation under subsection (a) for an eligible 
 program, the National Council shall include among the factors 
 considered the following:
 (A) The extent to which the population of training 
 participants in the program includes training 
 participants who are members of racial or ethnic 
 minority groups and women.
 (B) With respect to a racial or ethnic group or 
 women represented among the training participants, the 
 extent to which the group is underrepresented in the 
 field of medicine generally and in the various medical 
 specialities.
 (3) Underserved rural and inner-city communities.--In 
 making allocations under subsection (a) for eligible programs, 
 the National Council shall consider the extent to which the 
 population of training participants in the program includes 
 training participants who have resided in rural or inner-city 
 communities and the proportion of past participants in the 
 program who are practicing in rural or inner-city communities.
 (4) Recommendations of private organizations.--In making 
 allocations under subsection (a) for eligible programs, the 
 National Council shall consider the recommendations of 
 organizations representing physicians in the medical 
 specialties, the recommendations of organizations representing 
 academic medicine and the recommendations of organizations 
 representing consumers of the services of such physicians.
 (d) Definitions.--For purposes of this subtitle, the term 
``allocation period'' means a 3-year period under subsection (b)(1) for 
which allocations under subsection (a) are made by the National 
Council.

 CHAPTER 1--OPERATION OF APPROVED PHYSICIAN TRAINING PROGRAMS

SEC. 3031. FEDERAL FORMULA PAYMENTS TO QUALIFIED ENTITIES FOR THE COSTS 
 OF THE OPERATION OF APPROVED PHYSICIAN TRAINING PROGRAMS.

 (a) In General.--In the case of a qualified entity that in 
accordance with section 3032 submits to the Secretary an application 
for calendar year 1996 or any subsequent calendar year, the Secretary 
shall make payments for such year to the qualified entity for the 
purpose specified in subsection (b). The Secretary shall make the 
payments in an amount determined in accordance with section 3033, and 
may administer the payments as a contract, grant, or cooperative 
agreement.
 (b) Payments for Operation of Approved Physician Training 
Programs.--The purpose of payments under subsection (a) is to assist a 
qualified applicant with the costs of operation of an approved 
physician training program. A funding agreement for such payments is 
that the qualified applicant involved will expend the payments only for 
such purpose.
 (c) Qualified Applicant; Subpart Definition.--
 (1) In general.--For purposes of this subpart, the term 
 ``qualified applicant'', with respect to the calendar year 
 involved, means an entity--
 (A) that trains individuals in approved physician 
 training programs;
 (B) that submits to the Secretary an application 
 for such year in accordance with section 3032; and
 (C) if the entity has an approved physician 
 training program in primary health care, that rotates 
 individuals enrolled in the program to health centers 
 or other community programs in underserved urban or 
 rural areas.
 (2) Entities included.--The term ``qualified applicant'' 
 may include a teaching hospital, medical school, group 
 practice, an entity representing two or more parties engaged in 
 a formal association, a community health center or another 
 entity operating an approved physician training program.
 (d) Treatment of Podiatric and Dental Residency Programs.--For the 
purposes of chapters 1 and 3 of subpart C, an approved physician 
training program includes training programs approved by the Commission 
on Dental Accreditation or the Council of Podiatric Medical Education 
of the American Podiatric Medical Association. This subsection shall 
not apply for purposes of subpart B.

SEC. 3032. APPLICATION FOR PAYMENTS.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) In general.--For purposes of section 3031(a), an 
 application for payments under such section for a calendar year 
 is in accordance with this section if--
 (A) the eligible entity involved submits the 
 application not later than the date specified by the 
 Secretary;
 (B) the application demonstrates that the condition 
 described in subsection (b) is met with respect to the 
 program;
 (C) the application contains each funding agreement 
 described in this part and the application provides 
 such assurances of compliance with the agreements as 
 the Secretary may require; and
 (D) the application is in such form, is made in 
 such manner, and contains such agreements, assurances, 
 and information as the Secretary determines to be 
 necessary to carry out this part.
 (2) Certain entities.--If an applicant under paragraph (1) 
 is an entity representing two or more parties--
 (A) the application shall contain a written 
 agreement, signed by all participants, in which all of 
 the participants agree as to the manner in which the 
 payments will be allocated; and
 (B) the applicant shall agree to submit additional 
 documentation, if requested by the National Council, 
 that demonstrates that the funds are distributed in the 
 manner agreed upon by all participants.
 (b) Certain Conditions.--An eligible entity meets the condition 
described in this subsection for receiving payments under section 3031 
for a calendar year if--
 (1) the entity agrees to use such funds only to support an 
 approved physician training program;
 (2) with respect to--
 (A) a specialty for which programs have received 
 allocations under section 3013, the entity agrees that 
 funds will only be used to support approved training 
 programs for which the number of specialists in 
 training is consistent with the allotment under section 
 3013; and
 (B) a specialty for which a voluntary program has 
 received allocations under section 3012(e), the entity 
 agrees that funds will only be used to support approved 
 training programs for which the number of specialists 
 in training is consistent with the targets under 
 section 3012(e); and
 (3) the application of the entity contains a written 
 agreement, signed by all participants, in which all 
 participants agree to the manner in which the payments will be 
 allocated; and
 (4) the entity agrees to submit additional documentation, 
 if requested by the National Council, that demonstrates that 
 the funds will be distributed in a manner agreed upon by all 
 participants.

SEC. 3033. AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS FOR PAYMENTS; ANNUAL AMOUNT OF 
 PAYMENTS.

 (a) Annual Health Professions Workforce Account.--Subject to 
paragraph (2), the amount available for a calendar year for making 
payments under sections 3031 and 3061 (constituting an account to be 
known as the annual health professions workforce account) is the 
following, as applicable to the calendar year:
 (1) In the case of calendar year 1996, $3,200,000,000.
 (2) In the case of calendar year 1997, $3,550,000,000.
 (3) In the case of calendar year 1998, $4,800,000,000.
 (4) In the case of each of the calendar years 1999 and 
 2000, $5,800,000,000.
 (5) In the case of each subsequent calendar year, the 
 amount specified in paragraph (4) increased by the product of 
 such amount and the general health care inflation factor for 
 such year (as defined in subsection (d)).
 (b) Amount of Payments for Individual Eligible entities.--
 (1) In general.--Payment amounts with respect to any 
 physician training program under this section shall be equal to 
 the product of the number of full time equivalent training 
 participants in the program, and the per resident amount for 
 the training program.
 (2) Per resident amount.--The per resident amount for a 
 training program shall be equal to--
 (A) with respect to--
 (i) the first calendar years during which 
 the program is in operation, 90 percent;
 (ii) the second calendar years during which 
 the program is in operation, 80 percent;
 (iii) the third calendar years during which 
 the program is in operation, 70 percent;
 (iv) the fourth calendar years during which 
 the program is in operation, 60 percent; and
 (v) the fifth and subsequent calendar years 
 during which the program is in operation, 50 
 percent;
 of the all payer hospital per resident cost; and
 (B) with respect to--
 (i) the first calendar years during which 
 the program is in operation, 10 percent;
 (ii) the second calendar years during which 
 the program is in operation, 20 percent;
 (iii) the third calendar years during which 
 the program is in operation, 30 percent;
 (iv) the fourth calendar years during which 
 the program is in operation, 40 percent; and
 (v) the fifth and subsequent calendar years 
 during which the program is in operation, 50 
 percent;
 of the geographically adjusted national average per 
 resident amount.
 (3) Adjustment factor.--Payments under this section shall 
 be subject to an adjustment factor, as determined by the 
 Secretary, so that total payments in any year will not exceed 
 the amounts specified in section 3033(a) and as provided in 
 section 3033(c).
 (4) Additional provisions regarding national average 
 cost.--
 (A) The Secretary shall in accordance with 
 paragraph (1)(B) determine, for academic year 1992-93, 
 an amount equal to the national average described in 
 such paragraph with respect to training a participant 
 in an approved physician training program in the 
 medical specialty involved. The national average 
 applicable under such paragraph for a calendar year for 
 such programs is, subject to subparagraph (B), the 
 amount determined under the preceding sentence 
 increased by the amount necessary to offset the effects 
 of inflation occurring since academic year 1992-93, as 
 determined through use of the consumer price index.
 (B) The national average determined under 
 subparagraph (A) and applicable to a calendar year 
 shall, in the case of the eligible entity involved, be 
 adjusted by a factor to reflect regional differences in 
 the applicable wage and wage-related costs.
 (5) Funding level and allocation method.--Not later than 
 January 1, 1998, the Secretary shall complete a study to 
 determine the effect of the funding level and allocation method 
 described in subsection (a) and paragraphs (1) and (2) of this 
 subsection on the operation of training programs and shall 
 compile the findings and recommendations derived from such 
 study in a report to be submitted to the President and the 
 Congress.
 (c) Limitation.--If, subject to subsection (a)(2), the annual 
health professions workforce account available for a calendar year is 
insufficient for providing each eligible entity with the amount of 
payments determined under subsection (b) for the entity for such year, 
the Secretary shall make such pro rata reductions in the amounts so 
determined as may be necessary to ensure that the total of payments 
made under section 3031 for such year equals the total of such account.
 (d) Definitions.--For purposes of this subtitle:
 (1) The term ``annual health professions workforce 
 account'' means the account established pursuant to subsection 
 (a)(1).
 (2) The term ``consumer price index'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 1902(11).
 (3) The term ``general health care inflation factor'', with 
 respect to a year, has the meaning given such term in section 
 6001(a)(3) for such year.

 CHAPTER 2--MEDICAL SCHOOL FUND ACCOUNT

SEC. 3041. FEDERAL PAYMENTS TO THE MEDICAL SCHOOL FUND.

 (a) In General.--In the case of an eligible medical school that in 
accordance with section 3042 submits to the Secretary an application 
for academic year 1996, or any subsequent academic year, the Secretary 
shall make payments for such year to the school for the purpose 
specified in subsection (b). The Secretary shall make the payments in 
an amount determined in accordance with section 3043, and shall 
administer the payments as a grant.
 (b) Payments for the Medical School Fund.--The purpose specified in 
this subsection is to assist an eligible medical school with the direct 
costs of academic programs, including the education of medical students 
(especially in ambulatory and preventive medicine), graduate students 
in biomedical sciences, and otherwise unfunded faculty research. A 
funding agreement for such payments is that the medical school involved 
will expend the payments only for direct expenses determined as 
allowable by the Secretary.
 (c) Eligible medical school; Subpart Definition.--For purposes of 
this subpart, the term ``eligible medical school'' with respect to the 
academic year involved, means an approved medical school that submits 
to the Secretary an application for such year in accordance with 
section 3043.

SEC. 3042. APPLICATION FOR PAYMENTS.

 For purposes of section 3041(a), an application for payments under 
such section for an academic year is in accordance with this section 
if--
 (1) the dean (or appropriate presiding official) of the 
 eligible medical school submits the application not later than 
 the date specified by the Secretary;
 (2) the application contains each funding agreement 
 described in this subpart and provides such assurances of 
 compliance with the agreements as the Secretary may require; 
 and
 (3) the application is in such form, is made in such 
 manner, and contains such agreements, assurances, and 
 information as the Secretary determines to be necessary to 
 carry out this part.

SEC. 3043. AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS FOR PAYMENTS; ANNUAL AMOUNT OF 
 PAYMENTS.

 (a) Annual Medical School Fund Account.--Subject to section 3043, 
the amount available for an academic year for making payments under 
section 3041 (constituting an account to be known as the annual medical 
school fund account) shall be the following, as applicable to the 
academic year:
 (1) In the case of academic year 1996, $200,000,000.
 (2) In the case of academic year 1997, $300,000,000.
 (3) In the case of academic year 1998, $400,000,000.
 (4) In the case of academic year 1999, $500,000,000.
 (5) In the case of academic year 2000, $600,000,000.
 (6) In the case of each subsequent calendar year, the 
 amount specified in paragraph (5) increased by the product of 
 such amount and the general health care inflation factor (as 
 defined in subsection (d)).
 (b) Amount of Payments for Individual Eligible Programs.--Subject 
to the annual medical school fund account available for an academic 
year, the amount of payment required under section 3041 to be made to 
an eligible medical school for the academic year is an amount equal to 
the sum of--
 (1) the product of \3/4\ of the fund account available and 
 the proportion of full-time equivalent students at the eligible 
 medical school in academic year 1993-1994 compared to all full-
 time equivalent students enrolled in eligible medical schools 
 nationwide in academic year 1993-1994; and
 (2) the product of \1/4\ of the fund account available and 
 the proportion of research conducted by the faculty at the 
 eligible medical school compared to all research conducted by 
 the faculty at all eligible medical schools nationwide.
The Secretary shall establish a method for measuring faculty research 
contributions.
 (c) Studies.--
 (1) Funding level and allocation method.--Not later than 
 January 1, 1998, the Secretary shall arrange for an independent 
 study and report to be completed, by the Institute of Medicine 
 or other similar entity, concerning the amount of and 
 allocation method for medical school funding. Such report shall 
 be submitted to the President and the Congress and shall 
 include findings and recommendation as to the appropriateness 
 of modifying funding levels or allocation.
 (2) Not later than January 1, 2000, the Secretary shall 
 arrange for an independent study and report to be completed, by 
 the Institute of Medicine or other similar entity, concerning 
 the impact of health reform on undergraduate and graduate 
 medical education. Such report shall be submitted to the 
 President and the Congress and shall include appropriate 
 findings and recommendations.
 (d) Definitions.--As used in this subtitle:
 (1) The term ``annual medical school fund account'' means 
 the account established under subsection (a).
 (2) The term ``general health care inflation factor'' with 
 respect to a year, has the meaning given such term in section 
 6001(a)(3) for such year.

 CHAPTER 3--ACADEMIC HEALTH CENTERS

SEC. 3051. FEDERAL FORMULA PAYMENTS TO ACADEMIC HEALTH CENTERS.

 (a) In General.--In the case of a qualified academic health center 
or qualified teaching hospital that in accordance with section 3052 
submits to the Secretary a written request for calendar year 1996 or 
any subsequent calendar year, the Secretary shall make payments for 
such year to the center or hospital for the purpose specified in 
subsection (b). The Secretary shall make the payments in an amount 
determined in accordance with section 3053, and may administer the 
payments as a contract, grant, or cooperative agreement.
 (b) Payments for Costs Attributable to Academic Nature of 
Institutions.--The purpose of payments under subsection (a) is to 
assist eligible institutions with costs that are not routinely incurred 
by other entities in providing health services, but are incurred by 
such institutions in providing health services by virtue of the 
academic nature of such institutions. Such costs include--
 (1) with respect to productivity in the provision of health 
 services, costs resulting from the reduced rate of productivity 
 of faculty due to teaching responsibilities;
 (2) the uncompensated costs of clinical research; and
 (3) exceptional costs associated with the treatment of 
 health conditions with respect to which an eligible institution 
 has specialized expertise (including treatment of rare 
 diseases, treatment of unusually severe conditions, and 
 providing other specialized health care).
 (c) Definitions.--
 (1) Academic health center.--For purposes of this subtitle, 
 the term ``academic health center'' means an entity that 
 operates a teaching hospital that carries out an approved 
 physician training program.
 (2) Teaching hospital.--For purposes of this subtitle, the 
 term ``teaching hospital'' means a hospital that operates an 
 approved physician training program (as defined in section 
 3011(b) or section 3031(d)).
 (3) Qualified center or hospital.--For purposes of this 
 subtitle:
 (A) The term ``qualified academic health center'' 
 means an academic health center that operates a 
 teaching hospital.
 (B) The term ``qualified teaching hospital'' means 
 any teaching hospital other than a teaching hospital 
 that is operated by an academic health center.
 (4) Eligible institution.--For purposes of this subtitle, 
 the term ``eligible institution'', with respect to a calendar 
 year, means a qualified academic health center, or a qualified 
 teaching hospital, that submits to the Secretary a written 
 request in accordance with section 3052.

SEC. 3052. REQUEST FOR PAYMENTS.

 (a) In General.--For purposes of section 3051, a written request for 
payments under such section is in accordance with this section if the 
qualified academic health center or qualified teaching hospital 
involved submits the request not later than the date specified by the 
Secretary; the request is accompanied by each funding agreement 
described in this part; and the request is in such form, is made in 
such manner, and contains such agreements, assurances, and information 
as the Secretary determines to be necessary to carry out this part.
 (b) Continued Status as Academic Health Center.--A funding 
agreement for payments under section 3051 is that the qualified 
academic health center or qualified teaching hospital involved will 
maintain status as such a center or hospital, respectively. For 
purposes of this subtitle, the term ``funding agreement'', with respect 
to payments under section 3051 to such a center or hospital, means that 
the Secretary may make the payments only if the center or hospital 
makes the agreement involved.

SEC. 3053. AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS FOR PAYMENTS; ANNUAL AMOUNT OF 
 PAYMENTS.

 (a) Annual Academic Health Center Account.--The amount available 
for a calendar year for making payments under section 3051 
(constituting an account to be known as the annual academic health 
center account) is the following, as applicable to the calendar year:
 (1) In the case of calendar year 1996, $6,280,000,000.
 (2) In the case of calendar year 1997, $7,250,000,000.
 (3) In the case of calendar year 1998, $8,220,000,000.
 (4) In the case of calendar year 1999, $9,400,000,000.
 (5) In the case of calendar year 2000, $10,640,000,000.
 (6) In the case of each subsequent calendar year, the 
 amount specified in paragraph (5) increased by the product of 
 such amount and the general health care inflation factor (as 
 defined in subsection (d)).
 (b) Amount of Payments for Individual Eligible Institutions.--
 (1) Formula.--The amount of payments required in section 
 3051 to be made to an eligible institution for a calendar year 
 is an amount equal to the product of--
 (A) the annual academic health center account 
 available for the calendar year; and
 (B) the percentage constituted by the ratio of--
 (i) the product of--
 (I) the sum, for all discharges of 
 individuals, of the amounts otherwise 
 paid on behalf of such individuals; and
 (II) an adjustment factor equal to 
 1.200 multiplied by (((1+r) to the nth 
 power) - 1), where ``r'' equals the 
 ratio of the hospital's full-time 
 equivalent interns and residents to 
 beds and ``n'' equals .405; and
 (ii) the sum of the respective amounts 
 determined under clause (i) for eligible 
 institutions.
 (2) Adjustment factor.--Payments under this section shall 
 be subject to an adjustment factor, as determined by the 
 Secretary, so that total payments in any year will not exceed 
 the amounts specified in section 3033(a) and as provided in 
 section 3033(c).
 (c) Report Regarding Modifications in Formula.--Not later than July 
1, 2000, the Secretary shall submit to the Congress a report containing 
any recommendations of the Secretary for the modification of the 
program of formula payments described in this chapter. In preparing 
such report the Secretary shall consider--
 (1) the costs described in subsection (b) incurred by 
 academic health centers;
 (2) the adequacy of the formula payments established in 
 this chapter to cover such costs, taking into account any 
 additional revenues to cover such costs paid by other payers, 
 including private health plans;
 (3) the importance to the maintenance of a quality national 
 health care system of academic health centers in providing for 
 the training of health professionals, in conducting clinical 
 research, and in providing innovative, technically advanced 
 care; and
 (4) the overall impact of the reformed health care system 
 on the ability of academic health centers to perform such 
 functions.
 (d) Definition.--For purposes of this subtitle:
 (1) The term ``annual academic health center account'' 
 means the account established pursuant to subsection (a).
 (2) The term ``general health care inflation factor'', with 
 respect to a year, has the meaning given such term in section 
 6001(a)(3) for such year.

 Subpart D--General Provisions

SEC. 3055. DEFINITIONS.

 For purposes of this subtitle:
 (1) The term ``academic year'' has the meaning given such 
 term in section 3011(b).
 (2) The term ``allocation period'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 3013(d).
 (3) The term ``annual health professions workforce 
 account'' has the meaning given such term in section 3033(d).
 (4) The term ``annual number of specialty positions'' has 
 the meaning given such term in section 3012(e).
 (5) The term ``approved physician training program'' has 
 the meaning given such term in section 3011(b).
 (6) The term ``consumer price index'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 3033(d).
 (7) The term ``designation period'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 3012(e).
 (8) The term ``eligible entity'' has the meaning given such 
 term in section 3011(b), in the case of subpart B; and has the 
 meaning given such term in section 3031(c), in the case of 
 subpart C.
 (9) The term ``funding agreement'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 3011(b).
 (10) The term ``general health care inflation factor'' has 
 the meaning given such term in section 3033(d).
 (11) The term ``medical school'' has the meaning given such 
 term in section 3001(e).
 (12) The term ``medical specialty'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 3011(b).
 (13) The term ``National Council'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 3001(e).
 (14) The term ``primary health care'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 3012(e).
 (15) The term ``specialty position'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 3012(e).
 (16) The term ``training participant'' has the meaning 
 given such term in section 3012(e).

 Subpart E--Transitional Provisions

SEC. 3061. TRANSITIONAL PAYMENTS TO INSTITUTIONS.

 (a) Payments Regarding Effects of Subpart B Allocations.--For each 
of the four calendar years specified in subsection (b)(2), in the case 
of an eligible entity that submits to the Secretary an application for 
such year in accordance with subsection (d), the Secretary shall make 
payments for the year to the entity for the purpose specified in 
subsection (c). The Secretary shall make the payments in an amount 
determined in accordance with subsection (e), and may administer the 
payments as a contract, grant, or cooperative agreement.
 (b) Eligible Entities Losing Specialty Positions; Relevant Years 
Regarding Payments.--
 (1) Eligible entities losing specialty positions.--The 
 Secretary may make payments under subsection (a) to an eligible 
 entity only if, with respect to the calendar year involved, the 
 entity meets the following conditions:
 (A) The entity operates or operated in the year 
 preceding the initiation of transitional payments one 
 or more programs that--
 (i) are or were at the time they terminated 
 approved physician training programs; and
 (ii) are or were at the time they 
 terminated receiving payments under section 
 3031 for such year.
 (B) The aggregate number of speciality positions in 
 such programs (in the medical specialities with respect 
 to which such payments are made) is below the aggregate 
 number of such positions at the entity for academic 
 year 1993-94 as a result of allocations under subpart 
 B, or as a result of voluntary changes under section 
 3012(e) prior to January 1, 2000.
 (2) Relevant years.--The Secretary may make payments under 
 subsection (a) to an eligible entity only for the first four 
 calendar years after the initial calendar year for which the 
 entity meets the conditions described in paragraph (1).
 (3) Eligible entity.--For purposes of this section, the 
 term ``eligible entity'' means an entity that submits to the 
 Secretary an application in accordance with subsection (d).
 (c) Purpose of Payments.--The purpose of payments under subsection 
(a) is to assist an eligible entity with the costs of operation. A 
funding agreement for such payments is that the entity involved will 
expend the payments only for such purpose.
 (d) Application for Payments.--For purposes of subsection (a), an 
application for payments under such subsection is in accordance with 
this subsection if--
 (1) the eligible entity involved submits the application 
 not later than the date specified by the Secretary;
 (2) the application demonstrates that the entity meets the 
 conditions described in subsection (b)(1) and that the entity 
 has cooperated with the approved physician training programs of 
 the entity in meeting the condition described in section 
 3032(b);
 (3) the application contains each funding agreement 
 described in this subpart and the application provides such 
 assurances of compliance with the agreements as the Secretary 
 may require; and
 (4) the application is in such form, is made in such 
 manner, and contains such agreements, assurances, and 
 information as the Secretary determines to be necessary to 
 carry out this subpart.
 (e) Amount of Payments.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to the annual health professions 
 workforce account available for the calendar year involved, the 
 amount of payments required in subsection (a) to be made to an 
 eligible entity for such year is the product of the amount 
 determined under paragraph (2) and the applicable percentage 
 specified in paragraph (3).
 (2) Number of specialty positions lost.--For purposes of 
 paragraph (1), the amount determined under this paragraph for 
 an eligible entity for the calendar year involved is the 
 product of--
 (A) an amount equal to the aggregate number of 
 full-time equivalent specialty positions lost; and
 (B) the amount that would be received under section 
 3033 for each speciality position lost.
 (3) Applicable percentage.--For purposes of paragraph (1), 
 the applicable percentage for a calendar year is the following, 
 as applicable to such year:
 (A) For the first calendar year after calendar year 
 1995 for which the eligible entity involved meets the 
 conditions described in subsection (b)(1), 100 percent.
 (B) For the second such year, 75 percent.
 (C) For the third such year, 50 percent.
 (D) For the fourth such year, 25 percent.
 (4) Determination of specialty positions lost.--
 (A) For purposes of this subsection, the aggregate 
 number of specialty positions lost, with respect to a 
 calendar year, is the difference between--
 (i) the aggregate number of specialty 
 positions described in subparagraph (B) that 
 are estimated for the eligible entity involved 
 for the academic year beginning in such 
 calendar year; and
 (ii) the aggregate number of such specialty 
 positions at the entity for academic year 1993-
 94.
 (B) For purposes of subparagraph (A), the specialty 
 positions described in this subparagraph are specialty 
 positions in the medical specialities with respect to 
 which payments under section 3031 are made to the 
 approved physician training programs of the eligible 
 entities involved.
 (5) Additional provision regarding national average 
 salary.--
 (A) The Secretary shall determine, for academic 
 year 1992-93, an amount equal to the national average 
 described in paragraph (2)(B). The national average 
 applicable under such paragraph for a calendar year is, 
 subject to subparagraph (B), the amount determined 
 under the preceding sentence increased by an amount 
 necessary to offset the effects of inflation occurring 
 since academic year 1992-93, as determined through use 
 of the consumer price index.
 (B) The national average determined under 
 subparagraph (A) and applicable to a calendar year 
 shall, in the case of the eligible entity involved, be 
 adjusted by a factor to reflect regional differences in 
 the applicable wage and wage-related costs.

 PART 2--INSTITUTIONAL COSTS OF GRADUATE NURSING EDUCATION; WORKFORCE 
 PRIORITIES

SEC. 3071. AUTHORIZED GRADUATE NURSE TRAINING POSITIONS; INSTITUTIONAL 
 COSTS.

 (a) Program Regarding Graduate Nurse Training Programs.--The 
Secretary shall, in accordance with this part, carry out a program with 
respect to graduate nurse training programs that is equivalent to the 
program carried out under part 1 with respect to approved physician 
training programs.
 (b) Definitions.--For purposes of this part:
 (1) The term ``graduate nurse training programs'' means 
 programs for advanced nurse education, programs for education 
 as nurse practitioners, programs for education as nurse 
 midwives, programs for education as nurse anesthetists, and 
 such other programs for training in clinical nurse specialties 
 as are determined by the Secretary to require advanced 
 education.
 (2) The term ``graduate nurse training position'' means a 
 position as an individual who is enrolled in a graduate nurse 
 training program.
 (3) The term ``programs for advanced nurse education'' 
 means programs meeting the conditions to be programs for which 
 awards of grants and contracts may be made under section 821 of 
 the Public Health Service Act.
 (4) The term ``programs for education as nurse 
 practitioners'' means programs meeting the conditions to be 
 programs for which awards of grants and contracts may be made 
 under section 822 of the Public Health Service Act for 
 education as a nurse practitioners.
 (5) The term ``programs for education as nurse midwives'' 
 means programs meeting the conditions to be programs for which 
 awards of grants and contracts may be made under section 822 of 
 the Public Health Service Act for education as nurse midwives.
 (6) The term ``programs for education as nurse 
 anesthetists'' means programs meeting the conditions to be 
 programs for which awards of grants may be made under section 
 831 of the Public Health Service Act for education as nurse 
 anesthetists.

SEC. 3072. APPLICABILITY OF PART 1 PROVISIONS.

 (a) In General.--The provisions of part 1 apply to the program 
carried out under section 3071 to the same extent and in the same 
manner as such provisions apply to the program carried out under part 
1, subject to the subsequent provisions of this section. Section 3061 
does not apply for purposes of the preceding sentence.
 (b) National Council.--With respect to section 3001 as applied to 
this part, the council shall be known as the National Council on 
Graduate Nurse Education (in this part referred to as the ``National 
Council''). The provisions of section 851 of the Public Health Service 
Act regarding the composition of the council under such section apply 
to the composition of the National Council to the same extent and in 
the same manner as such provisions apply to the council under such 
section 851.
 (c) Allocation of Graduate Nurse Training Positions; Formula 
Payments for Operating Costs.--With respect to subparts B and C of part 
1 as applied to this part--
 (1) the funding agreement described in section 3011 is to 
 be made by graduate nurse training programs;
 (2) the applicable accrediting bodies described in section 
 3011 for graduate nurse training programs are the National 
 League of Nursing and others determined to be appropriate by 
 the Secretary;
 (3) designations under section 3012 and allocations under 
 section 3013 apply to graduate nurse training positions; and
 (4) payments under section 3031 are to be made to graduate 
 nurse training programs, subject to the requirements for such 
 payments.

SEC. 3073. FUNDING.

 (a) In General.--With respect to section 3033 as applied to this 
part, the provisions of this section apply.
 (b) Annual Graduate Nurse Training Account.--The amount available 
for each of the calendar years 1996 through 2000 for making payments 
pursuant to section 3072(c)(4) to graduate nurse training programs 
(constituting an account to be known as the annual graduate nurse 
training account) is $200,000,000.

 PART 3--RELATED PROGRAMS

 Subpart A--Workforce Development

SEC. 3081. PROGRAMS OF THE SECRETARY OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Funding.--For purposes of carrying out the programs 
 described in this section, there is authorized to be 
 appropriated $100,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1995 and 
 1996, and $150,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1997 
 through 2000 (in addition to amounts that may otherwise be 
 authorized to be appropriated for carrying out the programs).
 (2) Administration.--The programs described in this section 
 and carried out with amounts made available under subsection 
 (a) shall be carried out by the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services.
 (b) Primary Care Physician and Physician Assistant Training.--For 
purposes of subsection (a), the programs described in this section 
include programs to support projects to train additional numbers of 
primary care physicians and physician assistants, including projects to 
enhance community-based generalist training for medical students, 
residents, and practicing physicians; to retrain mid-career physicians 
previously certified in a nonprimary care medical specialty; to expand 
the supply of physicians with special training to serve in rural and 
inner-city medically underserved areas; to support expansion of 
service-linked educational networks that train a range of primary care 
providers in community settings; to provide for training in managed 
care, cost-effective practice management, and continuous quality 
improvement; to provide interdisciplinary training for medical 
students, residents or practicing physicians, and dental students, 
residents, and dental hygienists, to deliver primary care to 
individuals with mental, physical, and developmental disabilities, 
including mental retardation, particularly those who are more than 18 
years of age; and to develop additional information on primary care 
workforce issues as required to meet future needs in health care.
 (c) Training of Underrepresented Racial and Ethnic Minorities and 
Disadvantaged Persons.--For purposes of subsection (a), the programs 
described in this section include a program to support projects to 
increase the number of racial and ethnic underrepresented minority and 
disadvantaged persons in medicine, osteopathy, dentistry, advanced 
practice nursing, public health, psychology, and other health 
professions, including projects to provide continuing financial 
assistance for such persons entering health professions training 
programs; for financial assistance for facility renovation or 
construction; to increase support for recruitment and retention of such 
persons in the health professions; to maintain efforts to foster 
interest in health careers among such persons at the preprofessional 
level; and to increase the number of racial and ethnic minority health 
professions faculty at programs that have a significant number of 
underrepresented racial and ethnic minorities.
 (d) Expanding Rural Health Career Opportunities and Retention 
Efforts.--
 (1) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a), the 
 programs described in this section include programs to support 
 projects to increase the number of individuals living in rural, 
 underserved communities who enter the fields of medicine, 
 osteopathy, dentistry, advanced practice nursing, public 
 health, psychology, and other health professions, and to 
 encourage the retention of such health care professionals in 
 rural, underserved communities.
 (2) Rural health career training.--Projects to increase the 
 number of individuals recruited from rural, underserved areas 
 include projects--
 (A) to provide continuing financial assistance for 
 such persons entering health professions education and 
 training programs;
 (B) to increase efforts to foster interest in 
 health careers among such persons at the 
 preprofessional level;
 (C) to foster the development of training curricula 
 appropriate to rural health care settings; and
 (D) to increase support for recruitment of such 
 persons in the health professions.
 (3) Retention of rural health care providers.--Projects to 
 encourage the retention of individuals providing health care in 
 rural, underserved areas include projects--
 (A) to establish State and regional locum tenans 
 programs in rural health care settings so that 
 substitute health care providers are available when 
 permanent staff is absent from the health care setting;
 (B) to implement programs to foster 
 interdisciplinary team approaches to rural health 
 training and practice; and
 (C) to develop state-of-the-art network 
 telecommunications and telemedicine systems to link 
 rural health professionals to other health care 
 providers and academic health care centers.
 (e) Nurse Training.--For purposes of subsection (a), the programs 
described in this section include a program to support projects to 
support midlevel provider training and address priority nursing 
workforce needs, including projects to train additional nurse 
practitioners and nurse midwives; to support baccalaureate-level nurse 
training programs providing preparation for careers in teaching, 
community health service, and specialized clinical care; to train 
additional nurse clinicians and nurse anesthetists; to support 
interdisciplinary school-based community nursing programs; and to 
promote research on nursing workforce issues.
 (f) Inappropriate Practice Barriers; Full Utilization of Skills.--
For purposes of subsection (a), the programs described in this section 
include a program--
 (1) to develop and encourage the adoption of model 
 professional practice statutes for advanced practice nurses and 
 physician assistants, and to otherwise support efforts to 
 remove inappropriate barriers to practice by such nurses and 
 such physician assistants; and
 (2) to promote the full utilization of the professional 
 education and clinical skills of advanced practice nurses and 
 physician assistants.
 (g) Advisory Board on Health Care Workforce Development.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish an Advisory 
 Board known as the National Advisory Board on Health Care 
 Workforce Development to advise, consult with, and make 
 recommendations to the Secretary and to the Secretary of Labor 
 on matters relating to--
 (A) health care worker supply and its adequacy to 
 assure proper health care delivery system staffing in 
 both rural and urban areas; and
 (B) the impact of this Act, and of related changes 
 in law regarding health care, on health care workers 
 and the needs of such workers, including needs 
 regarding education, training, and other career 
 development matters.
 (2) Composition.--The Board established under paragraph (1) 
 shall be composed of the following members with expertise in 
 health care workforce issues appointed by the Secretary in 
 consultation with the Secretary of Labor:
 (A) Five representatives of labor organizations 
 representing health care workers.
 (B) Five representatives of health institutions.
 (C) Two representatives from health care education 
 organizations.
 (D) Two representatives from consumer 
 organizations.
 (3) Assistance.--The Secretary shall provide the Board with 
 such administrative assistance as may be necessary for the 
 Board to carry out this subsection.
 (h) Other Programs.--For purposes of subsection (a), the programs 
described in this section include a program to train health 
professionals and administrators in managed care, cost-effective 
practice management, continuous quality improvement practices, and 
provision of culturally sensitive care.
 (i) Relationship to Existing Programs.--This section may be carried 
out through programs established in title VII or VIII of the Public 
Health Service Act, as appropriate and as consistent with the purposes 
of such programs.
 (j) Mental Retardation and Other Developmental Disabilities.--Title 
VII of the Public Health Service Act is amended by inserting after 
section 778, the following new section:

``SEC. 779. MENTAL RETARDATION AND OTHER DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES.

 ``(a) In General.--The Secretary may make grants and enter into 
contracts with university affiliated programs, schools of medicine, and 
schools of dentistry to assist in meeting the costs of such programs or 
schools to--
 ``(1) improve the interdisciplinary training of primary 
 care physicians and dentists in the health care services needs 
 of individuals with mental, physical, and developmental 
 disabilities, including mental retardation, particularly those 
 who are more than 18 years of age;
 ``(2) develop, evaluate, and disseminate curricula relating 
 to the health care service needs of individuals with mental, 
 physical, and developmental disabilities, including mental 
 retardation, particularly those individuals who are more than 
 18 years of age;
 ``(3) support the training and retraining of faculty to 
 provide such instruction; and
 ``(4) support continuing education of health professionals 
 who provide health care services and support to individuals 
 with mental, physical, and developmental disabilities, 
 including mental retardation, particularly those who are more 
 than 18 years of age.
 ``(b) Authorization of Appropriations.--For purposes of carrying 
out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated, $10,000,000 
for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 2000.''.

SEC. 3082. PROGRAMS OF THE SECRETARY OF LABOR.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Funding.--For purposes of carrying out the programs 
 described in this section, and for carrying out section 3083, 
 there is authorized to be appropriated $200,000,000 for fiscal 
 year 1994 and each subsequent fiscal year (in addition to 
 amounts that may otherwise be authorized to be appropriated for 
 carrying out the programs).
 (2) Administration.--The programs described in this section 
 and carried out with amounts made available under subsection 
 (a) shall be carried out by the Secretary of Labor (in this 
 section referred to as the ``Secretary'').
 (b) Retraining Programs; Advanced Career Positions; Workforce 
Adjustment Programs.--
 (1) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a), the 
 programs described in this section are the following:
 (A) A program for skills upgrading and occupational 
 retraining (including retraining health care workers 
 for more advanced positions as technicians, nurses, and 
 physician assistants), and for quality and workforce 
 improvement.
 (B) A demonstration program to assist workers in 
 health care institutions in obtaining advanced career 
 positions.
 (C) A program to develop and operate health care 
 and health insurance industry worker job banks in local 
 employment services agencies or one-stop career 
 centers, subject to the following:
 (i) Such job banks shall be available to 
 all health care providers in the community 
 involved.
 (ii) Such job banks shall begin operation 
 not later than 90 days after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act.
 (iii)(I) With respect to each affected 
 community, the local employment service agency 
 or one-stop career center serving such 
 community shall be allocated not less than one 
 counselor whose responsibility it shall be to 
 develop and operate health and insurance 
 industry worker job banks. Where the impact of 
 health care industry restructuring in the 
 affected community is such that the functions 
 required under this clause cannot be adequately 
 provided by one counselor, additional 
 counselors shall be allocated to carry out such 
 functions.
 (II) Such counselor shall solicit job 
 openings from local health care industry 
 employers, maintain frequent contacts with 
 these and other employers, and monitor and 
 update all job listings appropriate for 
 displaced health care and health insurance 
 industry workers seeking employment.
 (III) The local employment service agency 
 or one-stop career center shall provide 
 directly, or facilitate the provision of, labor 
 exchange services to displaced health care and 
 insurance industry workers, including 
 assessment, counseling, testing, job-search 
 assistance, job referral and placement, and 
 referral to training and educational programs, 
 where appropriate.
 (IV) The Secretary of Labor shall develop 
 performance goals for the effective performance 
 of such job banks with respect to the number 
 and quality of jobs listed, the degree of 
 participation by employers in the affected 
 community, and success in placement of job bank 
 users in jobs listed, taking into account 
 specific geographic, economic and labor market 
 characteristics of the community served.
 (D) A program to provide for joint labor-management 
 decision-making in the health care sector on workplace 
 matters related to the restructuring of the health care 
 delivery system provided for in this Act.
 (E) A program to collect data regarding the 
 adequacy of the supply of health care workers by 
 occupation and sector of the health industry in light 
 of existing and projected demand for such workers.
 (F)(i) A program to encourage the adoption and 
 utilization of high performance, high quality health 
 care delivery systems, including employee participation 
 committees and employee team systems that will 
 contribute to more effective health care by increasing 
 the role and the area of independent decisionmaking of 
 health care workers.
 (ii) For purposes of this subparagraph, the term 
 ``employee participation committees'' means committees 
 of workers independently selected by and from a 
 facility's nonmanagerial workforce, or selected by 
 unions where collective bargaining agreements are in 
 effect, and which operate independently without 
 employer interference and consult with management on 
 issues of efficiency, productivity, and quality of 
 care, except that an employee participation committee 
 established under and operating in conformity with this 
 subparagraph shall not be considered a labor 
 organization within the meaning of section 2(5) of the 
 National Labor Relations Act or a representative within 
 the meaning of section 1, sixth, of the Railway Labor 
 Act.
 (2) Use of funds.--Amounts made available under subsection 
 (a) for carrying out this section may be expended for program 
 support, faculty development, trainee support, workforce 
 analysis, and dissemination of information, as necessary to 
 produce required performance outcomes.
 (c) Certain Requirements for Programs.--In carrying out the 
programs described in subsection (b), the Secretary shall, with respect 
to the organizations and employment positions involved, provide for the 
following:
 (1) Explicit, clearly defined skill requirements developed 
 for all the positions and projections of the number of openings 
 for each position.
 (2) Opportunities for internal career movement.
 (3) Opportunities to work while training or completing an 
 educational program.
 (4) Evaluation and dissemination.
 (5) Training opportunities in several forms, as 
 appropriate.
 (d) Administrative Requirements.--In carrying out the programs 
described in subsection (b), the Secretary shall, with respect to the 
organizations and employment positions involved, provide for the 
following:
 (1) Joint labor-management implementation and 
 administration.
 (2) Discussion with employees as to training needs for 
 career advancement.
 (3) Commitment to a policy of internal hirings and 
 promotion.
 (4) Provision of support services.
 (5) Consultations with employers and with organized labor.

SEC. 3083. REQUIREMENT FOR CERTAIN PROGRAMS REGARDING REDEPLOYMENT OF 
 HEALTH CARE WORKERS.

 (a) State Programs for Home and Community-Based Services for 
Individuals with Disabilities.--With respect to the plan required in 
section 2102(a) (for State programs for home and community-based 
services for individuals with disabilities under part 1 of subtitle B 
of title II), the plan shall, in addition to requirements under such 
part, provide for the following:
 (1) Before initiating the process of implementing the State 
 program under such plan, negotiations will be commenced with 
 labor unions representing the employees of the affected 
 hospitals or other facilities.
 (2) Negotiations under paragraph (1) will address the 
 following:
 (A) The impact of the implementation of the program 
 upon the workforce.
 (B) Methods to redeploy workers to positions in the 
 proposed system, in the case of workers affected by the 
 program.
 (3) The plan will provide evidence that there has been 
 compliance with paragraphs (1) and (2), including a description 
 of the results of the negotiations.
 (b) Plan for Integration of Mental Health Systems.--With respect to 
the plan required in section 3511(a) (relating to the integration of 
the mental health and substance abuse services of a State and its 
political subdivisions with the mental health and substance abuse 
services included in the comprehensive benefit package under title I), 
the plan shall, in addition to requirements under such section, provide 
for the following:
 (1) Before initiating the process of implementing the 
 integration of such services, negotiations will be commenced 
 with labor unions representing the employees of the affected 
 hospitals or other facilities.
 (2) Negotiations under paragraph (1) will address the 
 following:
 (A) The impact of the proposed changes upon the 
 workforce.
 (B) Methods to redeploy workers to positions in the 
 proposed system, in the case of workers affected by the 
 proposed changes.
 (3) The plan will provide evidence that there has been 
 compliance with paragraphs (1) and (2), including a description 
 of the results of the negotiations.

 Subpart B--Transitional Provisions for Workforce Stability

SEC. 3091. APPLICATION.

 (a) Limitation to Transition Period.--The provisions of this 
subpart are intended to minimize, to the extent possible, disruptions 
in established employment relationships during the period of transition 
to a restructured health care delivery system, and shall terminate 
December 31, 2000.
 (b) Health Care Entities Covered by Subpart.--The provisions of 
this subpart, including references to displacing employers, hiring 
employers, successors and contractors, apply only to health care 
entities that employ more than 25 individuals.

SEC. 3092. DEFINITIONS.

 (a) Health Care Entity.--As used in this subpart, the term ``health 
care entity'' includes individuals, sole proprietorships, partnerships, 
associations, business trusts, corporations, governmental institutions, 
and public agencies (including state governments and political 
subdivisions thereof) that--
 (1) provide health care services under title I (including 
 nonmandatory health care services under title I) or under the 
 amendments made or programs referred to in titles IV and VIII; 
 or
 (2) provide necessary related services, including 
 administrative, food service, janitorial or maintenance 
 services, to an entity that provides health care services (as 
 described in subparagraph (1));
except that an entity that solely manufactures or provides goods or 
equipment to a health care entity shall not be considered a health care 
entity.
 (b) Affiliated Enterprise.--As used in this subpart, the term 
``affiliated enterprise'' means a health care entity that, together 
with the displacing employer, is considered a single employer as 
defined under 414 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (c) Preference Eligible Employee.--As used in this subpart, the 
term ``preference eligible employee'' means an employee who--
 (1) has been employed for in excess of 1 year by a health 
 care entity; and
 (2) has been displaced by or has received notice of an 
 impending displacement by such entity.
 (d) Displacement.--As used in this subpart, the term 
``displacement'' includes a layoff, termination, significant cutback in 
paid work hours, or other loss of employment, except that a discharge 
for just cause shall not constitute a displacement within the meaning 
of this paragraph.

SEC. 3093. OBLIGATIONS OF DISPLACING EMPLOYER AND AFFILIATED 
 ENTERPRISES IN EVENT OF DISPLACEMENT.

 (a) Notice.--A health care entity which displaces a preference 
eligible employee shall provide such employee with--
 (1) written notice, no later than the date of displacement, 
 of employment rights under this subpart, including employment 
 rights with respect to affiliated enterprises of the displacing 
 employer; and
 (2) notice of any existing or subsequent vacancies with the 
 displacing employer or an affiliated enterprise, which notice 
 may be given by posting of such vacancies wherever notices to 
 applicants for employment are customarily posted, by listing 
 such vacancies with the local employment services agency, or in 
 such other manner as the Secretary of Labor, by regulation, may 
 hereafter specify.
Any such vacancy shall remain open for applications by preference 
eligible employees for not less than 14 calendar days from the date on 
which the initial notice is provided.
 (b) Hiring Preference.--
 (1) In general.--A qualified preference eligible employee 
 who applies during the notice period described in subsection 
 (a)(2) for a vacant position with the displacing employer or an 
 affiliated enterprise, which position is in the employee's 
 occupational specialty and is located in the same State or 
 Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area in which the employee 
 was employed prior to the displacement, shall be given the 
 right to accept or decline the position before the employer may 
 offer the position to a nonpreference eligible employee.
 (2) Multiple applications.--When considering applications 
 from more than one qualified preference eligible employee, the 
 hiring health care entity shall have discretion as to which of 
 such employees will be offered the position.
 (3) Employment qualifications.--Nothing in this subsection 
 shall be construed to prohibit the hiring health care entity 
 from establishing reasonable employment qualifications for a 
 vacancy to which this subpart applies, except that employees 
 who performed essentially the same work prior to their 
 displacement shall be deemed presumptively qualified for 
 comparable positions.
 (c) Termination of Preference Eligibility.--A displaced employee's 
preference eligibility shall terminate--
 (1) at such time as the displaced employee obtains 
 substantially equivalent employment with the displacing 
 employer; or
 (2) if the employee does not obtain such employment--
 (A) with respect to health care entities other than 
 the displacing employer, 2 years after the date of the 
 displacement; or
 (B) with respect to the displacing employer, upon 
 the termination of this subpart pursuant to section 
 3081(a).

SEC. 3094. EMPLOYMENT WITH SUCCESSORS.

 A health care entity that succeeds another health care entity 
through merger, consolidation, acquisition, contract, or other similar 
manner shall provide employees of the previous health care entity who 
would otherwise be displaced the right to continued employment in the 
job positions held by such employees prior thereto, unless the employer 
can establish that such positions no longer exist.

SEC. 3095. COLLECTIVE BARGAINING OBLIGATIONS DURING TRANSITION PERIOD.

 (a) Continuation of Previously Recognized Bargaining 
Representatives and Agreements.--If a majority of the employees in an 
appropriate bargaining unit consists of employees who were previously 
covered by a bargaining agreement or represented by an exclusive 
representative with respect to terms and conditions of employment, and 
there has not been a substantial change in the operations performed by 
the employees in that unit, the employer shall recognize such 
representative as the exclusive representative for the unit and shall 
assume the bargaining agreement, except that where application of this 
subsection would result in the recognition of more than one bargaining 
representative for a single unit, the question concerning which 
representative shall be recognized as the exclusive representative for 
the unit shall be resolved in accordance with applicable Federal or 
State law.
 (b) Joint Employer Status.--If employees of a contractor are 
assigned on a regular basis to perform work on the premises of a 
contracting entity and the tasks performed by these employees are 
functionally integrated with the operations of the contracting entity 
on whose premises such employees work, both the contractor and the 
contracting entity shall be considered joint employers of the employees 
with respect to work performed on those premises for purposes of 
determining compliance with labor relations laws. Employees of such 
joint employers may not be excluded from a bargaining unit within 
either entity on the basis of such joint employer status.

SEC. 3096. GENERAL PROVISIONS.

 (a) Regulations.--Not later than 120 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations to 
implement the requirements of section 3093.
 (b) Other Laws.--The standards and requirements of this subpart 
shall not preempt or excuse noncompliance with any other applicable 
Federal or State law, regulation or municipal ordinance that 
establishes additional notice and preference standards or requirements 
concerning employee dislocation, employee representation, or collective 
bargaining.
 (c) Rules of Construction.--Nothing in this subpart shall be 
construed--
 (1) to excuse or otherwise limit the obligation of an 
 employer to comply with any collective bargaining agreement or 
 any employment benefit plan that provides rights to employees 
 in addition to those provided under this subpart; or
 (2) to require an employer to recognize or bargain with a 
 labor organization in violation of State law.
 (d) Enforcement.--Unless otherwise specifically provided in this 
subpart, the enforcement provisions of section 107 of the Family and 
Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 U.S.C. 2617) shall apply with respect to 
the enforcement of the individual rights, including notice 
requirements, provided under section 3093. The collective bargaining 
and contractual rights provided under sections 3094 and 3095 shall be 
enforced through administrative and judicial procedures otherwise 
provided under Federal or State law with respect to such rights.

 Subtitle B--Academic Health Centers

SEC. 3131. DISCRETIONARY GRANTS REGARDING ACCESS TO CENTERS.

 (a) Rural Information and Referral Systems.--The Secretary may make 
grants to eligible centers for the establishment and operation of 
information and referral systems to provide the services of such 
centers to rural health plans.
 (b) Other Purposes Regarding Urban and Rural Areas.--The Secretary 
may make grants to community- and provider-based health plans under 
section 1651(d) to carry out activities (other than activities carried 
out under subsection (a)) for the purpose of providing the services of 
eligible centers to residents of rural or urban communities who 
otherwise would not have adequate access to such services.
 (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying 
out this section, there are authorized to be appropriate, $3,000,000 
for fiscal year 1995, $4,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, and $5,000,000 
for each of the fiscal years 1997 through 2000.

 Subtitle C--Health Research Initiatives

 PART 1--PROGRAMS FOR CERTAIN AGENCIES

SEC. 3201. BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL RESEARCH.

 (a) Findings.--Congress finds the following:
 (1) Nearly 4 of 5 peer reviewed research projects deemed 
 worthy of funding by the National Institutes of Health are not 
 funded.
 (2) Less than 2 percent of the nearly one trillion dollars 
 our Nation spends on health care is devoted to health research, 
 while the defense industry spends 15 percent of its budget on 
 research.
 (3) Public opinion surveys have shown that Americans want 
 more Federal resources put into health research and support by 
 having a portion of their health insurance premiums set aside 
 for this purpose.
 (4) Ample evidence exists to demonstrate that health 
 research has improved the quality of health care in the United 
 States. Advances such as the development of vaccines, the cure 
 of many childhood cancers, drugs that effectively treat a host 
 of diseases and disorders, a process to protect our Nation's 
 blood supply from the HIV virus, progress against 
 cardiovasculor disease including heart attack and stroke, and 
 new strategies for the early detection and treatment of 
 diseases such as colon, breast, and prostate cancer clearly 
 demonstrates the benefits of health research.
 (5) Among the most effective methods to control health care 
 costs are the prevention of intentional and unintentional 
 injury and the prevention and cure of disease and disability, 
 thus, health research which holds the promise of prevention of 
 intentional and unintentional injury and cure and prevention of 
 disease and disability is a critical component of any 
 comprehensive health care reform plan.
 (6) The state of our Nation's research facilities at the 
 National Institutes of Health and at universities is 
 deteriorating significantly. Renovation and repair of these 
 facilities are badly needed to maintain and improve the quality 
 of research.
 (7) Because the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 
 freezes discretionary spending for the next 5 years, the 
 Nation's investment in health research through the National 
 Institutes of Health is likely to decline in real terms unless 
 corrective legislative action is taken.
 (8) A health research fund is needed to maintain our 
 Nation's commitment to health research and to increase the 
 percentage of approved projects which receive funding at the 
 National Institutes of Health to at least 33 percent.
 (9) Private sector investment in research and development 
 has been responsible for the vast majority of new developments 
 in pharmaceuticals, medical devices, biotechnology and other 
 health care innovations. Over 90 percent of the most prescribed 
 drugs in the United States were discovered by the research-
 based pharmaceutical industry.
 (10) United States industry is the preeminent world leader 
 in the research, development and delivery of innovative 
 therapies that improve the quality of care for people 
 throughout the world.
 (11) Global health care budgets may constrict private 
 sector investment in research and development. Further, they 
 may be inconsistent with the goal of developing promising new 
 cost effective treatment therapies.
 (b) Availability of Funds.--
 (1) In general.--With respect to each calendar year, the 
 Secretary shall pay, from funds in the Treasury not otherwise 
 appropriated, for activities under this section in an amount 
 equal to 0.25 percent in 1996, 0.50 percent in 1997, 0.75 
 percent in 1998, and 1.0 percent in 1999 and subsequent years, 
 of all private premiums required to be paid under this Act.
 (2) For purposes of this subsection, the term ``private 
 health premiums'' means all premium related payments made by 
 employers, individuals, and families for coverage under this 
 Act.
 (c) Purposes for Expenditures.--Part A of title IV of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 281 et seq.) is amended by adding at the 
end thereof the following new section:

``SEC. 404F. EXPENDITURES FOR HEALTH RESEARCH.

 ``(a) In General.--From amounts made available under section 3201 
of the Health Security Act, the Secretary shall distribute--
 ``(1) 2 percent of such amounts during any fiscal year to 
 the Office of the Director of the National Institutes of Health 
 to be allocated at the Director's discretion for the following 
 activities:
 ``(A) for carrying out the responsibilities of the 
 Office of the Director, in including the Office of 
 Research on Women's Health and the Office of Research 
 on Minority Health, the Office of Alternative Medicine 
 and the Office of Rare Diseases Research; and
 ``(B) for construction and acquisition of equipment 
 for or facilities of or used by the National Institutes 
 of Health;
 ``(2) 2 percent of such amounts for transfer to the 
 National Center for Research Resources to carry out section 
 1502 of the National Institutes of Health Revitalization Act of 
 1993 concerning Biomedical and Behavioral Research Facilities;
 ``(3) 1 percent of such amounts during any fiscal year for 
 carrying out section 301 and part D of title IV with respect to 
 health information communications; and
 ``(4) the remainder of such amounts during any fiscal year 
 to member institutes of the National Institutes of Health and 
 Centers in the same proportion to the total amount received 
 under this section, as the amount of annual appropriations 
 under appropriations Acts for each member institute and Centers 
 for the fiscal year bears to the total amount of appropriations 
 under appropriations Acts for all member institutes and Centers 
 of the National Institutes of Health for the fiscal year.
 ``(b) Plans of Allocation.--The amounts transferred under 
subsection (a) shall be allocated by the Director of NIH or the various 
directors of the institutes and centers, as the case may be, pursuant 
to allocation plans developed by the various advisory councils to such 
directors, after consultation with such directors.''.

SEC. 3202. HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH.

 Section 902 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 299a), as 
amended by section 2(b) of Public Law 102-410 (106 Stat. 2094), is 
amended by adding at the end the following subsection:
 ``(f) Research on Health Care Reform.--
 ``(1) In general.--In carrying out section 901(b), the 
 Administrator shall conduct and support research on the reform 
 of the health care system of the United States, as directed by 
 the National Board.
 ``(2) Priorities.--In carrying out paragraph (1), the 
 Administrator shall give priority to the following:
 ``(A) Conducting and supporting research on the 
 appropriateness and effectiveness of alternative 
 clinical strategies (including community-based programs 
 and preventive services), the quality and outcomes of 
 care, and administrative simplification.
 ``(B) Conducting and supporting research on the 
 appropriateness and effectiveness of alternative 
 community-based and clinical strategies including 
 integrating preventive services into primary care, the 
 effectiveness of preventive counseling and health 
 education, and the efficacy and cost-effectiveness of 
 clinical preventive services.
 ``(C) Conducting and supporting research on 
 consumer choice and information resources; the effects 
 of health care reform on health delivery systems; 
 workplace injury and illness prevention; intentional 
 and unintentional injury prevention; methods for risk 
 adjustment; factors influencing access to health care 
 for vulnerable populations, including children, persons 
 with low-income, persons with disabilities, or 
 individuals with chronic or complex health conditions, 
 and primary care.
 ``(D) The development of clinical practice 
 guidelines consistent with section 913, the 
 dissemination of such guidelines consistent with 
 section 903, and the assessment of the effectiveness of 
 such guidelines.''.

 PART 2--FUNDING FOR PROGRAM

SEC. 3211. AUTHORIZATIONS OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 (a) Health Services Research.--For the purpose of carrying out 
activities pursuant to the amendments made by section 3202, there are 
authorized to be appropriated $150,000,000 for fiscal year 1995, 
$400,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, $500,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, 
and $600,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1998 through 2000.
 (b) Relation to Other Funds.--The authorization of appropriations 
established in subsection (a) are in addition to any other 
authorizations of appropriations that are available for the purposes 
described in such subsection.
 (c) Trigger and Release of Monies.--No expenditure shall be made 
pursuant to section 3201(c) during any fiscal year in which the annual 
amount appropriated for the National Institutes of Health is less than 
the amount so appropriated for the prior fiscal year. With respect to 
amounts available for expenditure pursuant to section 3201(c) which, as 
a result of the application of this subsection remain unexpended, such 
amounts shall be obligated by the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services under the public health initiative under subtitle H.

 Subtitle D--Core Functions of Public Health Programs; National 
 Initiatives Regarding Preventive Health

 PART 1--FUNDING

SEC. 3301. AUTHORIZATIONS OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 (a) Core Functions of Public Health Programs.--For the purpose of 
carrying out part 2, there are authorized to be appropriated 
$150,000,000 for fiscal year 1995, $225,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, 
$325,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, $425,000,000 for fiscal year 1998, 
$500,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, and $625,000,000 for fiscal year 
2000.
 (b) National Initiatives Regarding Health Promotion and Disease 
Prevention.--For the purpose of carrying out part 3, there are 
authorized to be appropriated $125,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 
1996 through 1998, and $150,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1999 
and 2000.
 (c) Relation to Other Funds.--The authorizations of appropriations 
established in subsections (a) and (b) are in addition to any other 
authorizations of appropriations that are available for the purposes 
described in such subsections.

 PART 2--CORE FUNCTIONS OF PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS

SEC. 3311. PURPOSES.

 Subject to the subsequent provisions of this subtitle, the purposes 
of this part are to strengthen the capacity of State and local public 
health agencies to carry out the following functions:
 (1) To monitor and protect the health of communities 
 against communicable diseases and exposure to toxic 
 environmental pollutants, occupational hazards, harmful 
 products, and poor quality health care.
 (2) To identify and control outbreaks of infectious disease 
 and patterns of chronic disease and injury.
 (3) To inform and educate health care consumers and 
 providers about their roles in preventing injury, preventing 
 and controlling disease and the appropriate use of medical 
 services.
 (4) To develop and test new prevention and public health 
 control interventions.
 (5) To integrate and coordinate the prevention programs and 
 services of health plans, community-based providers, local 
 health departments, State health departments, health alliances, 
 and other sectors of State and local government that affect 
 health, including education, labor, transportation, welfare, 
 criminal justice, environment, agriculture, and housing.
 (6) To conduct research on the effectiveness and cost-
 effectiveness of public health programs.

SEC. 3312. GRANTS TO STATES FOR CORE FUNCTIONS OF PUBLIC HEALTH.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall make grants to States that 
submit applications as prescribed in section 3313 in an amount which 
bears the same ratio to the available amounts for that fiscal year as 
the amounts provided by the Secretary under the provisions of law 
listed in section 1902(2) of the Public Health Service Act to the State 
for fiscal year 1981 bear to the total amount appropriated for such 
provisions of law for fiscal year 1981.
 (b) Core Functions of Public Health Programs.--For purposes of 
subsection (a), the functions described in this subsection are, subject 
to subsection (c), as follows:
 (1)(A) Data collection, activities related to population 
 health (including the population of individuals ineligible for 
 the comprehensive benefit package) measurement and outcomes 
 monitoring, including the acquisition and installation of 
 hardware and software, personnel training and technical 
 assistance to operate and support automated and integrated 
 information systems, the regular collection and analysis of 
 public health data, vital statistics, and personal health 
 services data and analysis for planning and needs assessment 
 purposes of data collected from health plans through the 
 information system under title V of this Act.
 (B) Data measures under this paragraph must include an 
 ethnic identifier on all forms. To the extent feasible, ethnic 
 identifiers should be classified by ethnic sub-group 
 populations. Access to data must be ensured for research 
 organizations and data clearinghouses. Population health 
 measurement and outcome monitoring should focus on health 
 status differentials between racial, and ethnic groups, by 
 subpopulation, and gender differences.
 (2) Activities to protect the environment and to assure the 
 safety of housing, workplaces, food and water, including the 
 following activities:
 (A) Monitoring and improving the overall public 
 health quality and safety of communities.
 (B) Assessing exposure to high lead levels and 
 water contamination.
 (C) Providing support for poison control centers.
 (D) Monitoring sewage and solid waste disposal, 
 radiation exposure, radon exposure, and noise levels.
 (E) Abatement of lead-related hazards.
 (F) Assuring recreation, home and worker safety.
 (G) Public information and education programs that 
 help to reduce intentional and unintentional injuries, 
 including training parents and children on use of 
 safety devices.
 (H) Enforcing public health safety and sanitary 
 codes.
 (I) Other activities relating to promoting the 
 public health of communities.
 (3) Investigation and control of adverse health conditions, 
 including improvements in emergency treatment preparedness, 
 injury prevention, cooperative activities to reduce violence 
 levels in homes and communities, activities to control the 
 outbreak of disease, exposure related conditions and other 
 threats to the health status of individuals.
 (4) Public information and education programs to reduce 
 risks to health such as use of tobacco, alcohol and other 
 drugs, sexual activities that increase the risk to HIV 
 transmission and sexually transmitted diseases, domestic 
 violence, poor diet, physical inactivity, and low childhood 
 immunization levels.
 (5) Accountability and quality assurance activities, 
 including monitoring the quality of personal health services 
 furnished by health plans and providers of medical and health 
 services in a manner consistent with the overall quality of 
 care monitoring activities undertaken under title V, and 
 monitoring communities' overall access to health services.
 (6) Provision of public health laboratory services to 
 complement private clinical laboratory services and that screen 
 for diseases and conditions such as metabolic diseases in 
 newborns, provide toxicology assessments of blood lead levels 
 and other environmental toxins, diagnose sexually transmitted 
 diseases, tuberculosis and other diseases requiring partner 
 notification, test for infectious and food-borne diseases, and 
 monitor the safety of water and food supplies.
 (7) Training and education to assure provision of care by 
 all health professionals, with special emphasis placed on the 
 training of public health professions including 
 epidemiologists, biostatisticians, health educators, public 
 health administrators, sanitarians and laboratory technicians.
 (8) Leadership, policy development and administration 
 activities, including needs assessment, the setting of public 
 health standards, the development of community public health 
 policies, and the development of community public health 
 coalitions.
 (c) Restrictions on Use of Grant.--
 (1) In general.--A funding agreement for a grant under 
 subsection (a) for a State is that the grant will not be 
 expended--
 (A) to provide inpatient services;
 (B) to make cash payments to intended recipients of 
 health services;
 (C) to purchase or improve land, purchase, 
 construct, or permanently improve (other than minor 
 remodeling) any building or other facility, or purchase 
 major medical equipment;
 (D) to satisfy any requirement for the expenditure 
 of non-Federal funds as a condition for the receipt of 
 Federal funds; or
 (E) to provide financial assistance to any entity 
 other than a public or nonprofit private entity.
 (2) Limitation on administrative expenses.--A funding 
 agreement for a grant under subsection (a) is that the State 
 involved will not expend more than 10 percent of the grant for 
 administrative expenses with respect to the grant.
 (d) Maintenance of Effort.--A funding agreement for a grant under 
subsection (a) is that the State involved will maintain expenditures of 
non-Federal amounts for core health functions at a level that is not 
less than the level of such expenditures maintained by the State for 
the fiscal year preceding the first fiscal year for which the State 
receives such a grant.

SEC. 3313. SUBMISSION OF INFORMATION.

 The Secretary may make a grant under section 3312 only if the State 
involved submits to the Secretary the following information:
 (1) A description of existing deficiencies in the State's 
 public health system (at the State level and the local level), 
 using standards of sufficiency developed by the Secretary.
 (2) A description of health status measures to be improved 
 within the State (at the State level and the local level) 
 through expanded public health functions.
 (3) Measurable outcomes and process objectives for 
 improving health status and core health functions for which the 
 grant is to be expended.
 (4) Information regarding each such function, which--
 (A) identifies the amount of State and local 
 funding expended on each such function for the fiscal 
 year preceding the fiscal year for which the grant is 
 sought; and
 (B) provides a detailed description of how 
 additional Federal funding will improve each such 
 function by both the State and local public health 
 agencies.
 (5) A description of the core health functions to be 
 carried out at the local level, and a specification for each 
 such function of--
 (A) the communities in which the function will be 
 carried out; and
 (B) the amount of the grant to be expended for the 
 function in each community so specified.

SEC. 3314. REPORTS.

 A funding agreement for a grant under section 3312 is that the 
States involved will, not later than the date specified by the 
Secretary, submit to the Secretary a report describing--
 (1) the purposes for which the grant was expended; and
 (2) describing the extent of progress made by the State in 
 achieving measurable outcomes and process objectives described 
 in section 3313(3).

SEC. 3315. APPLICATION FOR GRANT.

 The Secretary may make a grant under section 3312 only if an 
application for the grant is submitted to the Secretary, the 
application contains each agreement described in this part, the 
application contains the information required in section 3314, and the 
application is in such form, is made in such manner, and contains such 
agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary determines to 
be necessary to carry out this part.

SEC. 3316. ALLOCATIONS FOR CERTAIN ACTIVITIES.

 Of the amounts made available under section 3301 for a fiscal year 
for carrying out this part, the Secretary may reserve not more than 5 
percent for carrying out the following activities:
 (1) Technical assistance with respect to planning, 
 development, and operation of core health functions carried out 
 under section 3312, including provision of biostatistical and 
 epidemiological expertise and provision of laboratory 
 expertise.
 (2) Development and operation of a national information 
 network among State and local health agencies.
 (3) Program monitoring and evaluation of core health 
 functions carried out under section 3312.
 (4) Development of a unified electronic reporting mechanism 
 to improve the efficiency of administrative management 
 requirements regarding the provision of Federal grants to State 
 public health agencies.

SEC. 3317. DEFINITIONS.

 For purposes of this part:
 (1) The term ``funding agreement'', with respect to a grant 
 under section 3312 to a State, means that the Secretary may 
 make the grant only if the State makes the agreement involved.
 (2) The term ``core health functions'', with respect to a 
 State, means the functions described in section 3312(b).

SEC. 3318. SINGLE APPLICATION AND UNIFORM REPORTING SYSTEMS FOR CORE 
 FUNCTIONS OF PUBLIC HEALTH AND PUBLIC HEALTH CATEGORICAL 
 GRANT PROGRAMS ADMINISTERED BY THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE 
 CONTROL AND PREVENTION.

 (a) Single Application.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the Director 
 of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall 
 establish a single consolidated application to enable States to 
 apply for the Core Functions of Public Health Grants Program 
 and any or all of the Public Health Service Act categorical 
 programs described in subsection (b).
 (2) Requirements.--The application developed under 
 paragraph (1) shall--
 (A) be designed so that information collected will 
 be consistent with the requirements of this part 
 including subsection (b);
 (B) be designed and implemented not later than 1 
 year after the date of enactment of this Act; and
 (C) be developed with resources made available 
 under section 3316 (not resources made available for 
 the programs described in subsection (b)).
 (3) State public health officers.--In developing the single 
 consolidated application form to be used under this subsection 
 the Secretary shall consult with Federal, State and local 
 public health agencies.''.
 (4) Eligibility.--States and local governments that have 
 grants, contracts or cooperative agreements in effect with the 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on the date of 
 enactment of this Act shall be eligible to use a single 
 application under this section to apply for any or all of the 
 Public Health Service Act categorical programs described in 
 subsection (b).
 (b) Eligible Public Health Service Act Programs.--Eligible Public 
Health Service Act categorical programs described in this subsection 
are the following:
 (1) The Preventive Health and Health Services Block Grant 
 under section 1903 of the Public Health Service Act.
 (2) The Childhood Lead Poisoning Prevention Program under 
 section 317A of the Public Health Service Act.
 (3) The Sexually Transmitted Diseases Program under section 
 318 of the Public Health Service Act.
 (4) The Prevention of Sexually Transmitted Diseases-Related 
 Infertility Program under section 318A of the Public Health 
 Service Act.
 (5) The Breast and Cervical Cancer Early Detection Program 
 under sections 1501 through 1509 of the Public Health Service 
 Act.
 (6) The National Program of Cancer Registries under section 
 399H of the Public Health Service Act.
 (7) The Injury Control and Prevention Program under 
 sections 391 through 394 of the Public Health Service Act.
 (8) The preventive health for prostate cancer program under 
 section 317D of the Public Health Service Act.
 (9) The birth defects data program under section 317C of 
 the Public Health Service Act.
 (10) Programs under subtitle D of this title.
 (11) Other relevant programs as determined appropriate by 
 the Secretary.
 (c) Allocation of Funds.--In awarding grants to States and local 
governments under a single application under this section, the 
Secretary shall delineate to each grantee the amounts to be dedicated 
to each of the programs described in subsection (b) and ensure that 
funding allotments for each of such programs are consistent with the 
requirements of Federal law.
 (d) Uniform Core Functions of Public Health Reporting System.--
 (1) Development.--The Secretary, acting through the 
 Director of the Office of Disease Prevention and Health 
 Promotion and the Director of the Centers for Disease Control 
 and Prevention, in consultation with other relevant Federal and 
 State health agencies with data collection responsibilities, 
 shall develop and implement a Uniform Core Public Health 
 Functions Reporting System to collect program and fiscal data 
 concerning the programs described in subsection (b).
 (2) Requirements.--The system developed under paragraph (1) 
 shall--
 (A) use outcomes consistent with the goals of 
 Healthy People 2000;
 (B) be designed so that information collected will 
 be consistent with the requirements of this part 
 including subsection (b);
 (C) be designed and implemented not later than 2 
 years after the date of enactment of this Act; and
 (D) be developed with resources made available 
 under section 3316 of this Act (not resources made 
 available for the programs described in subsection 
 (b)).
 (3) State public health officers.--In developing the data 
 set to be used under Uniform Core Public Health Functions 
 Reporting System the Secretary shall consult with Federal, 
 State and local public health agencies.
 (e) Study.--
 (1) In general.--Within a reasonable period of time after 
 the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall request 
 that the Institute of Medicine conduct a study concerning--
 (A) the effects of consolidating any or all of the 
 grant programs administered by the Centers for Disease 
 Control and Prevention and described in subsection (b) 
 into a Core Functions of Public Health Block Grant 
 Program;
 (B) the development of alternative methods for 
 implementing a block grant program or categorical grant 
 program; and
 (C) alternative formulas for allocating State 
 grants that incorporate measures of health status, 
 population and degree of poverty.
 In particular, the impact of program consolidation on the 
 targeted recipients, including women and vulnerable 
 populations, shall be addressed in the study. If the Institute 
 of Medicine declines to do the study, the Secretary shall make 
 grants to or enter into contracts with a public or nonprofit 
 private entity with relevant expertise for the conduct of such 
 a study.
 (2) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the 
 receipt of the contract under paragraph (1), the contract 
 recipient shall prepare and submit to the Secretary, the Energy 
 and Commerce Committee of the House of Representatives, and the 
 Committee on Labor and Human Resources of the Senate a report 
 that contains the results of the study conducted under 
 paragraph (1).
 (3) Issuance of plan.--Not later than 1 year after the date 
 on which the report under paragraph (2) is received by the 
 Secretary and the committees referred to in such paragraph, the 
 Secretary shall issue a plan in response to the report. Such a 
 plan shall include the identification of relevant changes in 
 authorizing language.

 PART 3--NATIONAL INITIATIVES REGARDING HEALTH PROMOTION AND DISEASE 
 PREVENTION

 Subpart A--General Grants

SEC. 3331. GRANTS FOR NATIONAL PREVENTION INITIATIVES.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary may make grants to entities 
described in subsection (b) for the purpose of carrying out projects to 
develop and implement innovative community-based strategies to provide 
for health promotion and disease prevention activities for which there 
is a significant need, as identified under section 1701 of the Public 
Health Service Act.
 (b) Eligible Entities.--The entities referred to in subsection (a) 
are agencies of State or local government, private nonprofit 
organizations (including research institutions), and coalitions that 
link two or more of these groups.
 (c) Certain Activities.--The Secretary shall ensure that projects 
carried out under subsection (a)--
 (1) reflect approaches that take into account the special 
 needs and concerns of the affected populations;
 (2) are targeted to the most needy and vulnerable 
 population groups and geographic areas of the Nation;
 (3) examine links between various high priority preventable 
 health problems and the potential community-based remedial 
 actions; and
 (4) establish or strengthen the links between the 
 activities of agencies engaged in public health activities with 
 those of health alliances, health care providers, and other 
 entities involved in the personal health care delivery system 
 described in title I.

SEC. 3332. PRIORITIES.

 (a) Establishment.--
 (1) Annual statement.--The Secretary shall for each fiscal 
 year develop a statement of proposed priorities for grants 
 under section 3331 for the fiscal year.
 (2) Allocations among priorities.--With respect to the 
 amounts available under section 3301(b) for the fiscal year for 
 carrying out this part, each statement under paragraph (1) for 
 a fiscal year shall include a specification of the percentage 
 of the amount to be devoted to projects addressing each of the 
 proposed priorities established in the statement.
 (3) Process for establishing priorities.--
 (A) Preference.--In establishing priorities for 
 grants under this part, preference shall be given to 
 projects that--
 (i) reduce the prevalence of chronic 
 diseases including cardiovascular disease, 
 stroke, diabetes, and cancer;
 (ii) prevent violence against women by 
 training providers and other health care 
 professionals to identify victims of domestic 
 violence, to provide appropriate examination 
 and treatment, and to refer the victims for 
 appropriate social and legal services; and
 (iii) establish community health advisor 
 programs described in subparagraph (B).
 (B) Community health advisor programs.--For 
 purposes of subparagraph (A)(iii), the term ``community 
 health advisor program'' means a program that performs 
 the following functions:
 (i) Provides outreach services to inform 
 the community of the availability of program 
 services.
 (ii) Collaborate efforts with health care 
 providers and related entities to facilitate 
 the provision of health services and health 
 related social services.
 (iii) Provide public education on health 
 promotion and disease prevention and efforts to 
 facilitate the use of available health services 
 and health-related social services.
 (iv) Provide health-related counseling.
 (v) Make referrals for available health 
 services and health-related social services.
 (vi) Improve the ability of individuals to 
 use health services and health-related social 
 services under Federal, State, and local 
 programs, through assisting individuals in 
 establishing eligibility under the programs.
 (vii) Establish a community health advisor 
 training program.
 (viii) Provide services in the language and 
 cultural context most appropriate for the 
 individuals served by the program.
 (ix) Provide compensation for the services 
 of, and opportunities for training and 
 employment of, community health advisors.
 (x) Such other services as the Secretary 
 determines to be appropriate, which may include 
 transportation and translation services.
 (C) Publication of statement.--Not later than 
 January 1 of each fiscal year, the Secretary shall 
 publish a statement under paragraph (1) in the Federal 
 Register. A period of 60 days shall be allowed for the 
 submission of public comments and suggestions 
 concerning the proposed priorities. After analyzing and 
 considering comments on the proposed priorities, the 
 Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register final 
 priorities (and associated reservations of funds) for 
 approval of projects for the following fiscal year.
 (D) Definition of community health advisor.--For 
 purposes of subparagraph (B), the term ``community 
 health advisor'' means an individual--
 (i) who has demonstrated the capacity to 
 carry out one or more of the authorized program 
 services;
 (ii) who, for not less than 1 year, has 
 been a resident of the community in which the 
 community health advisor program involved is to 
 be operated; and
 (iii) is a member of a socioeconomic group 
 to be served by the program.
 (b) Applicability to Making of Grants.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary may make grants under 
 section 3331 for projects that the Secretary determines--
 (A) are consistent with the applicable final 
 statement of priorities and otherwise meets the 
 objectives described in subsection (a); and
 (B) will assist in meeting a health need or concern 
 of a population within a defined health care coverage 
 area or other service area.
 (2) Special consideration for certain projects.--In making 
 grants under section 3331, the Secretary shall give special 
 consideration to applicants that will carry out projects that, 
 in addition to being consistent with the applicable published 
 priorities under subsection (a) and otherwise meeting the 
 requirements of this part, have the potential for replication 
 in other communities.

SEC. 3333. SUBMISSION OF INFORMATION.

 The Secretary may make a grant under section 3331 only if the 
applicant involved submits to the Secretary the following information:
 (1) A description of the activities to be conducted, and 
 the manner in which the activities are expected to contribute 
 to meeting one or more of the priority health needs specified 
 under section 3332 for the fiscal year for which the grant is 
 initially sought.
 (2) A description of the total amount of Federal funding 
 requested, the geographic area and populations to be served, 
 and the evaluation procedures to be followed.
 (3) Such other information as the Secretary determines to 
 be appropriate.

SEC. 3334. APPLICATION FOR GRANT.

 The Secretary may make a grant under section 3331 only if an 
application for the grant is submitted to the Secretary, the 
application contains each agreement described in this part, the 
application contains the information required in section 3333, and the 
application is in such form, is made in such manner, and contains such 
agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary determines to 
be necessary to carry out this part.

 Subpart B--Development of Telemedicine in Rural Underserved Areas

SEC. 3341. GRANTS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF RURAL TELEMEDICINE.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Grants awarded.--The Secretary, acting through the 
 Office of Rural Health Policy, shall award grants to eligible 
 entities that have applications approved under subsection (b) 
 for the purpose of expanding access to health care services for 
 individuals in rural areas through the use of telemedicine. 
 Grants shall be awarded under this section to encourage the 
 initial development of rural telemedicine networks, expand 
 existing networks, link existing networks together, or link 
 such networks to existing fiber optic telecommunications 
 systems.
 (2) Eligible entity defined.--For purposes of this section, 
 the term ``eligible entity'' means public or nonprofit entities 
 in nonmetropolitan areas (as defined by the Department of 
 Commerce) in a consortium of community-based providers that 
 includes at least three of the following:
 (A) community or migrant health centers;
 (B) local health departments;
 (C) community mental health centers;
 (D) nonprofit hospitals
 (E) private practice health professionals, 
 including rural health clinics; or
 (F) other publicly funded health or social services 
 agencies.
 (b) Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this 
section an eligible entity shall prepare and submit to the Secretary 
for approval an application at such time, in such manner, and 
containing such information as the Secretary may require, including a 
description of the use to which the entity will apply any amounts 
received under the grant.
 (c) Preference in Awarding Grants.--The Secretary shall, in 
awarding grants under this section give preference to applicants that--
 (1) are health care providers in a rural health care 
 network or that propose to form such a network, if a majority 
 of the providers in such network are located in a medically 
 underserved area or health professional shortage area;
 (2) can demonstrate broad geographic coverage in the rural 
 areas of the State, or States, in which the applicant is 
 located;
 (3) propose to use the amounts provided under the grant to 
 develop plans for, or to establish, telemedicine systems that 
 will link rural hospitals and other rural health care providers 
 to other hospitals and health care providers;
 (4) will use the amounts provided under the grant for a 
 broad range of health care applications such as teleradiology, 
 telepathology, interactive video consultation and remote 
 educational services, and to promote greater efficiency in the 
 use of health care resources and administrative activities; and
 (5) propose to use local matching funds to finance 
 projects.
 (d) Use of Amounts.--Amounts received under a grant awarded under 
this section shall be utilized for the development of telemedicine 
networks involving three or more providers. Such amounts may be used to 
cover the costs associated with the development of telemedicine 
networks and the acquisition or construction of telecommunications 
facilities and equipment including--
 (1) the development and acquisition through lease or 
 purchase of computer hardware and software, audio and visual 
 equipment, computer network equipment, telecommunications 
 transmission facilities, telecommunications terminal equipment, 
 interactive video equipment, data terminal equipment, and other 
 facilities and equipment that would further the purposes of 
 this section;
 (2) the provision of technical assistance and instruction 
 for the development and use of such programming equipment or 
 facilities;
 (3) the development and acquisition of instructional 
 programming;
 (4) demonstration projects for teaching or training medical 
 students, residents, and other health professions students in 
 rural training sites about the applications of telemedicine;
 (5) transmission costs, maintenance of equipment, and 
 compensation of specialists and referring practitioners;
 (6) demonstration projects to use telemedicine to 
 facilitate collaboration between physicians and nonphysician 
 primary care practitioners such as physician assistants, nurse 
 practitioners, and certified nurse-midwives; or
 (7) such other uses that are consistent with achieving the 
 purposes of this section as approved by the Secretary.

SEC. 3342. REPORT AND EVALUATION OF TELEMEDICINE.

 Three years after the first grant is awarded under section 3341 the 
Secretary shall submit a report to Congress that evaluates all 
telemedicine projects funded through the Department of Health and Human 
Services. Such report shall evaluate--
 (1) whether telemedicine expands access to health care 
 services;
 (2) the cost effectiveness of telemedicine services; and
 (3) the quality of telemedicine services delivered.

SEC. 3343. RECOMMENDATIONS ON REIMBURSEMENT OF TELEMEDICINE.

 The Secretary, in consultation with the Office of Rural Health and 
the Health Care Financing Administration, shall issue regulations 
regarding reimbursement for telemedicine services provided under title 
XVIII of the Social Security Act no later than July 1, 1996.

 Subtitle E--Health Services for Medically Underserved Populations

 PART 1--INITIATIVES FOR ACCESS TO HEALTH CARE

 Subpart A--Authorization of Appropriations

SEC. 3411. AUTHORIZATIONS OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 (a) Improving Access to Health Services.--
 (1) Subpart b.--
 (A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), for the 
 purpose of carrying out subpart B, there are authorized 
 to be appropriated $52,500,000 for fiscal year 1995, 
 $122,500,000 for fiscal year 1996, $192,500,000 for 
 fiscal year 1997, $157,500,000 for fiscal year 1998, 
 $122,500,000 for fiscal year 1999, and $52,500,000 for 
 fiscal year 2000.
 (B) With respect to awards to federally qualified 
 health centers (as defined in section 1861(aa)(4) of 
 the Social Security Act) under subpart B, there are 
 authorized to be appropriated $97,500,000 for fiscal 
 year 1995, $227,500,000 for fiscal year 1996, 
 $357,500,000 for fiscal year 1997, $292,500,000 for 
 fiscal year 1998, $227,500,000 for fiscal year 1999, 
 and $97,500,000 for fiscal year 2000.
 (2) Subpart c.--
 (A) For the purpose of providing loans under 
 subpart C, there are authorized to be appropriated such 
 sums as may be necessary to support a loan level of 
 $200,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 
 2000.
 (B) For the purpose of making grants under subpart 
 C, there are authorized to be appropriated $35,000,000 
 for each of the fiscal year 1995 through 2000.
 (b) Relation to Other Funds.--The authorizations of appropriations 
established in subsection (a) are in addition to any other 
authorizations of appropriations that are available for the purpose 
described in such subsection.
 (c) Eligible Entities.--For purposes of this part, the term 
``eligible entities'' means--
 (1) covered entities as defined in section 340B(a)(4) of 
 the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 256b(a)(4)), except 
 that subsection (a)(4)(L)(iii) and (a)(7) of such section shall 
 not apply;
 (2) school health service sites under title III of this 
 Act;
 (3) nonprofit hospitals meeting the criteria for public 
 hospitals which are eligible entities under section 340B of the 
 Public Health Service Act, except that subsection 
 (a)(4)(L)(iii) of such section shall not apply, and children's 
 hospitals meeting comparable criteria as determined appropriate 
 by the Secretary;
 (4) public and private, nonprofit community mental health 
 centers and substance abuse treatment providers receiving funds 
 from the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
 Administration;
 (5) runaway homeless youth centers or transitional living 
 programs for homeless youth for the provision of health 
 services under the Runaway Homeless Youth Act of 1974 (42 
 U.S.C. 5701 et seq.);
 (6) rural referral centers under section 1886(d)(5)(C) of 
 the Social Security Act, except that such eligibility is 
 restricted to the receipt of grants under section 3441; and
 (7) public or nonprofit entities in nonmetropolitan areas 
 (as defined by the Department of Commerce) in a consortium of 
 community-based providers that includes at least three of the 
 following:
 (A) community or migrant health centers;
 (B) local health departments;
 (C) community mental health centers;
 (D) nonprofit hospitals;
 (E) private practice health professionals, 
 including rural health clinics; or
 (F) other publicly funded health or social services 
 agencies;
 except that such eligibility is restricted to the receipt of 
 grants or contracts under section 3421(a).
 (d) Priority.--In making awards from amounts appropriated under 
subsection (a)(1)(B) and section 3462, the Secretary shall give the 
highest priority to providing adequate assistance to federally 
qualified health centers in order to ensure the provision of 
comprehensive primary health care services, other covered services and 
benefits, and enabling services to medically underserved populations 
that were served by such centers prior to the date of enactment of this 
Act, except that such federally qualified health centers must continue 
to meet the requirements for designation under section 1861(aa)(4) of 
the Social Security Act.
 (e) Equitable Distribution.--The Secretary shall, in awarding 
grants, entering into contracts, and making loans under this part, 
assure an equitable distribution of funds between rural and urban 
areas.

Subpart B--Development of Community Health Groups and Health Care Sites 
 and Services

SEC. 3421. GRANTS AND CONTRACTS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF PLANS AND NETWORKS 
 AND THE EXPANSION AND DEVELOPMENT OF HEALTH CARE SITES 
 AND SERVICES.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary may make grants to and enter into 
contracts with eligible entities described in section 3411(c) for--
 (1) the development of community health groups whose 
 principal purpose is to provide the comprehensive benefit 
 package under title I in one or more health professional 
 shortage areas or to provide such items and services to a 
 significant number of individuals who are members of a 
 medically underserved population; and
 (2) the expansion of existing health delivery sites and 
 services and the development of new health delivery sites and 
 services.
 (b) Service Area.--In making an award under subsection (a), the 
Secretary shall designate the geographic area with respect to which the 
community health group involved is to provide health services.
 (c) Priority.--In making awards under subsection (a)(1), the 
Secretary shall give priority to proposals in which a greater number of 
eligible entities and other health care providers, especially providers 
in community-and provider-based health plans under section 1651(d), are 
participants in the community health group, except in areas such as 
rural areas, where providers are severely limited in number.
 (d) Limitation on Awards.--The Secretary may not make awards under 
subsection (a)(1) for more than 5 years to the same community health 
group.
 (e) Definitions.--For purposes of this subpart:
 (1) The term ``community health group'' means--
 (A) a community health network that--
 (i) is a public or nonprofit private 
 consortium of health care providers that 
 principally provides some of the items and 
 services of the basic benefit package to 
 medically underserved populations, and 
 residents of health professional shortage 
 areas;
 (ii) has an agreement with one or more 
 health plans; and
 (iii) has a written agreement governing the 
 participation of health care providers in the 
 consortium to which each participating provider 
 is a party; or
 (B) a community health plan that--
 (i) is a public or nonprofit private entity 
 that principally provides all of the items and 
 services of the basic benefit package to 
 medically underserved populations, and 
 residents of health professional shortage 
 areas;
 (ii) is a participant in one or more health 
 alliances; and
 (iii) has a written agreement governing the 
 participation of health care providers in the 
 consortium to which each participating provider 
 is a party.
 (2) The term ``health professional shortage areas'' means 
 health professional shortage areas designated under section 332 
 of the Public Health Service Act.
 (3) The term ``medically underserved population'' means a 
 medically underserved population designated under section 
 330(b)(3) of the Public Health Service Act, populations 
 residing in health professional shortage areas under section 
 332 of the Public Health Service Act, and populations eligible 
 for premium subsidies and cost sharing reductions based on 
 income under title I.

SEC. 3422. CERTAIN USES OF AWARDS.

 (a) In General.--Amounts awarded under section 3421 may be expended 
for--
 (1) the development of a community health group, including 
 entering into contracts between the recipient of the award and 
 health care providers who are to participate in the group;
 (2) the expansion, development and on-going operation of 
 health delivery sites and services; and
 (3) activities under paragraphs (1) and (2) which include--
 (A) the recruitment, compensation, and training of 
 health professionals and administrative staff;
 (B) the purchase and upgrading of equipment, 
 supplies, and information systems including 
 telemedicine systems; and
 (C) the establishment of reserves required for 
 furnishing services on a prepaid or capitated basis, 
 except that eligible entities may use non-cash 
 mechanisms (including bonds, letters of credit and 
 federally guaranteed reinsurance pools) for 
 establishing and maintaining financial reserves.
 (b) Loans and Grants.--The Secretary may expend, in any fiscal 
year, not to exceed 10 percent of the amounts appropriated to carry out 
this subpart to make loans and grants to eligible entities to support 
the types of activities described in section 3441, subject to the 
requirements of subpart C, except that, with respect to amounts 
available for non-federally qualified health center activities, such 
funds may be used to convert facilities from providers of acute care 
service to providers of primary, emergency or long-term care.

SEC. 3423. APPLICATION.

 The Secretary may not make an award to an entity under section 3421 
until such entity submits and application to the Secretary, in such 
form and containing such assurances and information as the Secretary 
determines appropriate, including--
 (1) an assessment of the need that the medically 
 underserved population or populations proposed to be served by 
 the applicant have for health services and for enabling 
 services (as defined in section 3461);
 (2) a description of how the applicant will design the 
 proposed community health plan or practice network (including 
 the service sites involved) for such populations based on the 
 assessment of need;
 (3) a description of efforts to secure financial and 
 professional assistance and support for the project; and
 (4) evidence of significant community involvement in the 
 initiation, development and ongoing operation of the project.

SEC. 3424. PURPOSES AND CONDITIONS.

 Grants shall be made under this subpart for the purposes and 
subject to all of the conditions under which eligible entities 
otherwise receive funding to provide health services to medically 
underserved populations under the Public Health Service Act. The 
Secretary shall prescribe comparable purposes and conditions for 
eligible entities not receiving funding under the Public Health Service 
Act.

 Subpart C--Capital Cost of Development of Community Health Groups and 
 Other Purposes

SEC. 3441. DIRECT LOANS AND GRANTS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall make grants and loans to--
 (1) eligible entities (as defined in section 3412(c));
 (2) hospitals designated by the Secretary as essential 
 access community hospitals under section 1820(i)(1) of the 
 Social Security Act; or
 (3) rural primary care hospitals under section 1820(i)(2) 
 of such Act;
for the capital costs of developing community health groups (as defined 
in section 3421(e)) and expanding existing health delivery sites or 
developing new health delivery sites.
 (b) Use of Assistance.--
 (1) In general.--The capital costs for which grants and 
 loans made pursuant to subsection (a) may be expended are, 
 subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the following:
 (A) The acquisition, modernization, expansion or 
 construction of facilities, or the conversion of 
 unneeded hospital facilities to facilities that will 
 assure or enhance the provision and accessibility of 
 health care and enabling services to medically 
 underserved populations.
 (B) The purchase of major equipment, including 
 equipment necessary for the support of external and 
 internal information systems.
 (C) The establishment of reserves required for 
 furnishing services on a prepaid or capitated basis.
 (D) Such other capital costs as the Secretary may 
 determine are necessary to achieve the objectives of 
 this section.
 (2) Priorities regarding use of funds.--In providing grants 
 and loans under subsection (a) for an entity, the Secretary 
 shall give priority to authorizing the use of amounts for 
 projects for the renovation and modernization of medical 
 facilities necessary to prevent or eliminate safety hazards 
 including asbestos removal, avoid noncompliance with licensure 
 or accreditation standards, or projects to replace obsolete 
 facilities.
 (3) Limitation.--The Secretary may authorize the use of 
 grants and loans under subsection (a) for the construction of 
 new buildings only if the Secretary determines that appropriate 
 facilities are not available through acquiring, modernizing, 
 expanding or converting existing buildings, or that 
 construction new buildings will cost less.
 (c) Amount of Assistance.--
 (1) In general.--The principal amount of loans under 
 subsection (a) may cover up to 90 percent of the costs 
 involved.
 (2) Grants.--Grants under this subsection may not exceed 75 
 percent of the costs involved.
 (d) Interest Subsidies.--Amounts provided under this section may be 
used to provide interest subsidies for loans provided under this 
section where such subsidies are necessary to make a project financial 
feasible.

SEC. 3442. CERTAIN REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary may approve a loan under section 
3441 only if--
 (1) the Secretary is reasonably satisfied that the 
 applicant for the project for which the loan would be made will 
 be able to make payments of principal and interest thereon when 
 due; and
 (2) the applicant provides the Secretary with reasonable 
 assurances that there will be available to it such additional 
 funds as may be necessary to complete the project or 
 undertaking with respect to which such loan is requested.
 (b) Terms and Conditions.--Any loan made under section 3441 shall, 
subject to the Federal Credit Reform Act of 1990, meet such terms and 
conditions (including provisions for recovery in case of default) as 
the Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, 
determines to be necessary to carry out the purposes of such section 
while adequately protecting the financial interests of the United 
States. Terms and conditions for such loans shall include provisions 
regarding the following:
 (1) Security.
 (2) Maturity date.
 (3) Amount and frequency of installments.
 (4) Rate of interest, which shall be at a rate comparable 
 to the rate of interest prevailing on the date the loan is 
 made.

SEC. 3443. DEFAULTS; RIGHT OF RECOVERY.

 (a) Defaults.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary may take such action as may 
 be necessary to prevent a default on loans under section 3441, 
 including the waiver of regulatory conditions, deferral of loan 
 payments, renegotiation of loans, and the expenditure of funds 
 for technical and consultative assistance, for the temporary 
 payment of the interest and principal on such a loan, and for 
 other purposes.
 (2) Foreclosure.--The Secretary may take such action, 
 consistent with State law respecting foreclosure procedures, as 
 the Secretary deems appropriate to protect the interest of the 
 United States in the event of a default on a loan made pursuant 
 to section 3441, including selling real property pledged as 
 security for such a loan and for a reasonable period of time 
 taking possession of, holding, and using real property pledged 
 as security for such a loan.
 (3) Waivers.--The Secretary may, for good cause, but with 
 due regard to the financial interests of the United States, 
 waive any right of recovery which the Secretary has by reasons 
 of the failure of a borrower to make payments of principal of 
 and interest on a loan made pursuant to section 3441, except 
 that if such loan is sold and guaranteed, any such waiver shall 
 have no effect upon the Secretary's guarantee of timely payment 
 of principal and interest.
 (b) Twenty-Year Obligation; Right of Recovery; Subordination; 
Waivers.--
 (1) In general.--With respect to an eligible entity for 
 which a grant or loan was made under section 3441, the 
 Secretary may award the grant or loan only if the applicant 
 involved agrees that the applicant will be liable to the United 
 States for the amount of the grant or loan, together with an 
 amount representing interest, if at any time during the 20-year 
 period beginning on the date of completion of the activities 
 involved, the entity--
 (A) ceases to be an eligible entity utilized by a 
 community health group, or by another public or 
 nonprofit private entity that provides health services 
 in one or more health professional shortage areas or 
 that provides such services to a significant number of 
 individuals who are members of a medically underserved 
 population; or
 (B) is sold or transferred to any entity other than 
 an entity that is--
 (i) a community health group or other 
 entity described in subparagraph (A); and
 (ii) approved by the Secretary as a 
 purchaser or transferee regarding the facility.
 (2) Subordination; waivers.--With respect to essential 
 community providers, the Secretary may subordinate or waive the 
 right of recovery under paragraph (1), and any other Federal 
 interest that may be derived by virtue of a grant or loan under 
 section 3441, if the Secretary determines that subordination or 
 waiver will further the objectives of this part.

SEC. 3444. PROVISIONS REGARDING CONSTRUCTION OR EXPANSION OF 
 FACILITIES.

 (a) Submission of Information.--In the case of a project for 
construction, conversion, expansion or modernization of a facility, the 
Secretary may provide loans under section 3441 only if the applicant 
submits to the Secretary the following:
 (1) A description of the site.
 (2) Plans and specifications which meet requirements 
 prescribed by the Secretary.
 (3) Information reasonably demonstrating that title to such 
 site is vested in one or more of the entities filing the 
 application (unless the agreement described in subsection 
 (b)(1) is made).
 (4) A specification of the type of assistance being 
 requested under section 3441.
 (b) Agreements.--In the case of a project for construction, 
conversion, expansion or modernization of a facility, the Secretary may 
provide loans under section 3441 only if the applicant makes the 
following agreements:
 (1) Title to such site will be vested in one or more of the 
 entities filing the application (unless the assurance described 
 in subsection (a)(3) has been submitted under such subsection).
 (2) Adequate financial support will be available for 
 completion of the project and for its maintenance and operation 
 when completed.
 (3) All laborers and mechanics employed by contractors or 
 subcontractors in the performance of work on a project will be 
 paid wages at rates not less than those prevailing on similar 
 construction in the locality as determined by the Secretary of 
 Labor in accordance with the Act of March 3, 1931 (40 U.S.C. 
 276a et seq; commonly known as the Davis-Bacon Act), and the 
 Secretary of Labor shall have with respect to such labor 
 standards the authority and functions set forth in 
 Reorganization Plan Numbered 14 of 1950 (15 FR 3176; 5 U.S.C. 
 Appendix) and section 276c of title 40.
 (4) The facility will be made available to all persons 
 seeking service regardless of their ability to pay.

SEC. 3445. APPLICATION FOR ASSISTANCE.

 The Secretary may provide loans under section 3441 only if an 
application for such assistance is submitted to the Secretary, the 
application contains each agreement described in this subpart, the 
application contains the information required in section 3444(a), and 
the application is in such form, is made in such manner, and contains 
such agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary 
determines to be necessary to carry out this subpart.

SEC. 3446. ADMINISTRATION OF PROGRAMS.

 This subpart, and any other program of the Secretary that provides 
loans, shall be carried out by a centralized loan unit established 
within the Department of Health and Human Services.

 Subpart D--Enabling and Supplemental Services

SEC. 3461. GRANTS AND CONTRACTS FOR ENABLING AND SUPPLEMENTAL SERVICES.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary may make grants to and enter into 
contracts with eligible entities to assist such entities in providing 
the services described in subsections (b) and (c) for the purpose of 
increasing the capacity of individuals to utilize the items and 
services included in the comprehensive benefits package under title I, 
and to provide access to essential supplemental services that are not 
fully reimbursable under title I prior to January 2001,.
 (b) Enabling Services.--Enabling services shall include 
transportation, community and patient outreach, patient and family 
education, translation services, case management, home visiting, and 
such other services as the Secretary determines to be appropriate in 
carrying out the purpose described in such subsection.
 (c) Supplemental Services.--Supplemental services shall include 
items or services described in section 1106 or section 1118 of this Act 
that would otherwise be excluded from coverage prior to January 1, 
2001.
 (d) Certain Requirements Regarding Project Area.--The Secretary may 
make an award of a grant or contract under subsection (a) only if the 
applicant involved--
 (1) submits to the Secretary--
 (A) information demonstrating that the medically 
 underserved populations in the community to be served 
 under the award have a need for enabling services; and
 (B) a proposed budget for providing such services;
 (2) the applicant for the award agrees that the medically 
 underserved residents of the community will be consulted with 
 respect to the design and implementation of the project carried 
 out with the award;
 (3) agrees that the services will not be denied because the 
 individual is unable to pay for such services; and
 (4) agrees that the applicant will utilize existing 
 resources to the maximum extent practicable.
 (e) Application for Awards of Assistance.--The Secretary may make 
an award of a grant or contract under subsection (a) only if an 
application for the award is submitted to the Secretary, the 
application contains each agreement described in this subpart, and the 
application is in such form, is made in such manner, and contains such 
agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary determines to 
be necessary to carry out this subpart.

SEC. 3462. AUTHORIZATIONS OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 (a) Enabling Services.--For the purpose of carrying out section 
3461(b), there are authorized to be appropriated $35,000,000 for fiscal 
year 1996, $140,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1997 through 1999, 
and $175,000,000 for fiscal year 2000.
 (b) Supplemental Services.--For the purpose of carrying out section 
3461(c), there are authorized to be appropriated $100,000,000 for 
fiscal year 1995, $150,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, and $250,000,000 
for each of the fiscal years 1997 through 2000.
 (c) Federally Qualified Health Centers.--With respect to federally 
qualified health centers (as defined in section 1861(aa)(4) of the 
Social Security Act), for the purpose of carrying out section 3461(b), 
there are authorized to be appropriated $65,000,000 for fiscal year 
1996, $260,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1997 through 1999, and 
$325,000,000 for fiscal year 2000.
 (d) Relation to Other Funds.--The authorizations of appropriations 
established in subsection (a) are in addition to any other 
authorizations of appropriations that are available for the purpose 
described in such subsection.

 PART 2--NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE CORPS

SEC. 3471. AUTHORIZATIONS OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 (a) Additional Funding; General Corps Program; Allocations 
Regarding Nurses.--For the purpose of carrying out subpart II of part D 
of title III of the Public Health Service Act, and for the purpose of 
carrying out section 3472, there are authorized to be appropriated 
$150,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, $150,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, 
and $250,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1998 through 2000.
 (b) Relation to Other Funds.--The authorizations of appropriations 
established in subsection (a) are in addition to any other 
authorizations of appropriations that are available for the purpose 
described in such subsection.

SEC. 3472. ALLOCATION FOR PARTICIPATION OF NURSES IN SCHOLARSHIP AND 
 LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAMS.

 Of the amounts appropriated under section 3471, the Secretary shall 
reserve such amounts as may be necessary to ensure that, of the 
aggregate number of individuals who are participants in the Scholarship 
Program under section 338A of the Public Health Service Act, or in the 
Loan Repayment Program under section 338B of such Act, the total number 
who are being educated as nurse practitioners, nurse midwives, or nurse 
anesthetists or are serving as nurse practitioners, nurse midwives, or 
nurse anesthetists, respectively, is increased to 20 percent.

SEC. 3473. ALLOCATION FOR PARTICIPATION OF PSYCHIATRISTS, 
 PSYCHOLOGISTS, AND CLINICAL SOCIAL WORKERS IN SCHOLARSHIP 
 AND LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAMS.

 Of the amounts appropriate under section 3471, the Secretary shall 
reserve such amounts as may be necessary to ensure that of the 
aggregate number of individuals who are participants in the scholarship 
program under section 338A of the Public Health Service Act, the number 
who are being educated as psychiatrists, psychologists, and clinical 
social workers or are serving as psychiatrists, psychologists, and 
clinical social workers, respectively, is increased to 15 percent.

 PART 3--PAYMENTS TO HOSPITALS SERVING VULNERABLE POPULATIONS

SEC. 3481. PAYMENTS TO HOSPITALS.

 (a) Entitlement Status.--The Secretary shall make payments in 
accordance with this part to eligible hospitals described in section 
3482. The preceding sentence--
 (1) is an entitlement in the Secretary on behalf of such 
 eligible hospitals (but is not an entitlement in the State in 
 which any such hospital is located or in any individual 
 receiving services from any such hospital); and
 (2) constitutes budget authority in advance of 
 appropriations Acts and represents the obligation of the 
 Federal Government to provide funding for such payments in the 
 amounts, and for the fiscal years, specified in subsection (b).
 (b) Appropriations.--
 (1) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a)(2), the 
 amounts and fiscal years specified in this subsection are (in 
 the aggregate for all eligible hospitals) $1,300,000,000 for 
 the fiscal year in which the general effective date occurs and 
 for each subsequent fiscal year.
 (2) Special rule for years before general effective date.--
 (A) In general.--For each of the fiscal years 1996 
 and 1997, the amount specified in this subsection for 
 purposes of subsection (a)(2) shall be equal to the 
 aggregate DSH percentage of the amount otherwise 
 determined under paragraph (1).
 (B) Aggregate dsh percentage defined.--In 
 subparagraph (A), the ``aggregate DSH percentage'' for 
 a year is the amount (expressed as a percentage) equal 
 to--
 (i) the total amount of payment made by the 
 Secretary under section 1903(a) of the Social 
 Security Act during the base year with respect 
 to payment adjustments made under section 
 1923(c) of such Act for hospitals in the States 
 in which eligible hospitals for the year are 
 located; divided by
 (ii) the total amount of payment made by 
 the Secretary under section 1903(a) of such Act 
 during the base year with respect to payment 
 adjustments made under section 1923(c) of such 
 Act for hospitals in all States.
 (c) Payments Made on Quarterly Basis.--Payments to an eligible 
hospital under this section for a year shall be made on a quarterly 
basis during the year.

SEC. 3482. IDENTIFICATION OF ELIGIBLE HOSPITALS.

 (a) State Identification.--In accordance with the criteria 
described in subsection (b) and such procedures as the Secretary may 
require, each State shall identify the hospitals in the State that meet 
such criteria and provide the Secretary with a list of such hospitals.
 (b) Criteria for Eligibility.--A hospital meets the criteria 
described in this subsection if the hospital's low-income utilization 
rate for the base year under section 1923(b)(3) of the Social Security 
Act (as such section is in effect on the day before the date of the 
enactment of this Act) is not less than 25 percent.

SEC. 3483. AMOUNT OF PAYMENTS.

 (a) Distribution of Allocation for Low-Income Assistance.--
 (1) Allocation from total amount.--Of the total amount 
 available for payments under this section in a year, 66.66 
 percent shall be allocated to hospitals for low-income 
 assistance in accordance with this subsection.
 (2) Determination of hospital payment amount.--The amount 
 of payment to an eligible hospital from the allocation made 
 under paragraph (1) during a year shall be the equal to the 
 hospital's low-income percentage of the allocation for the 
 year.
 (b) Distribution of Allocation for Assistance for Uncovered 
Services.--
 (1) Allocation from total amount; determination of state-
 specific portion of allocation.--Of the total amount available 
 for payments under this section in a year, 33.33 percent shall 
 be allocated to hospitals for assistance in furnishing hospital 
 services that are not covered services under title I (in 
 accordance with regulations of the Secretary) or in furnishing 
 hospital services to individuals, including those residing in 
 Southwestern border States, who are not eligible individuals 
 under title I, in accordance with this subsection. The amount 
 available for payments to eligible hospitals in a State shall 
 be equal to an amount determined in accordance with a 
 methodology specified by the Secretary that shall take into 
 consideration the volume of such services provided by hospital 
 in the State as compared to the volume of such services 
 provided by all eligible hospitals.
 (2) Determination of hospital payment amount.--The amount 
 of payment to an eligible hospital in a State from the amount 
 available for payments to eligible hospitals in the State under 
 paragraph (1) during a year shall be the equal to the 
 hospital's low-income percentage of such amount for the year.
 (c) Low-Income Percentage Defined.--
 (1) In general.--In this subsection, an eligible hospital's 
 ``low-income percentage'' for a year is equal to the amount 
 (expressed as a percentage) of the total low-income days for 
 all eligible hospitals for the year that are attributable to 
 the hospital.
 (2) Low-income days described.--For purposes of paragraph 
 (1), an eligible hospital's low-income days for a year shall be 
 equal to the product of--
 (A) the total number of inpatient days for the 
 hospital for the year (as reported to the Secretary by 
 the State in which the hospital is located, in 
 accordance with a reporting schedule and procedures 
 established by the Secretary); and
 (B) the hospital's low-income utilization rate for 
 the base year under section 1923(b)(3) of the Social 
 Security Act (as such section is in effect on the day 
 before the date of the enactment of this Act).

SEC. 3484. BASE YEAR.

 In this part, the ``base year'' is, with respect to a State and 
hospitals in a State, the year immediately prior to the year in which 
the general effective date occurs.

 PART 4--SENSE OF THE COMMITTEE

SEC. 3491. SENSE OF THE COMMITTEE.

 It is the sense of the Committee on Labor and Human Resources of 
the Senate that when the Health Security Act is enacted, it and 
subsequent appropriations Acts should appropriately recognize the 
success of community and migrant health centers as a proven, cost-
effective model for the delivery of health care services to those 
populations which are medically underserved because of economic, 
geographic, and cultural barriers.

 Subtitle F--Mental Health; Substance Abuse

 PART 1--AUTHORITIES REGARDING PARTICIPATING STATES

SEC. 3510. INTEGRATION OF MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE SYSTEMS.

 (a) In General.--As a condition of being a participating State 
under title I, each State shall, not later than January 1, 2001, 
achieve the integration of the mental illness and substance abuse 
services of the State and its political subdivisions with the mental 
illness and substance abuse services offered by health plans pursuant 
to title I of this Act. A State may petition the Secretary for a waiver 
of the requirement of this subsection under the circumstances described 
in section 3511(b)(7).
 (b) Certification of Readiness.--
 (1) Petition.--A State may petition the Secretary to 
 integrate the mental illness and substance abuse services of 
 the State and its political subdivisions with the mental 
 illness and substance abuse services offered by health plans 
 pursuant to title I of this Act prior to January 1, 2001.
 (2) State readiness to integrate.--Upon receiving such a 
 petition, the Secretary shall, based on the reports submitted 
 pursuant to subsections (b) and (c) of section 3511 and the 
 criteria promulgated pursuant to paragraph (3), ascertain the 
 State's readiness to integrate its mental illness and substance 
 abuse services with the mental illness and substance abuse 
 services offered by health plans pursuant to title I of this 
 Act and certify whether the State is prepared to conduct such 
 an integration.
 (3) Criteria.--The certification by the Secretary of a 
 State's readiness to integrate under paragraph (2) shall be 
 based on objective criteria promulgated by the Secretary after 
 consultation with the States.
 (c) Application of Provisions.--Upon the issuance of a 
certification of readiness by the Secretary for a State, the limits set 
forth in subsections (d)(2)(B) and (e)(2)(A) of section 1106 shall not 
apply to the provision of mental illness and substance abuse services 
in the State.

SEC. 3511. REPORT ON INTEGRATION OF MENTAL HEALTH SYSTEMS.

 (a) In General.--As a condition of being a participating State 
under title I, each State shall, not later than October 1, 1998, submit 
to the Secretary a report containing the information described in 
subsection (b) on (including a plan for) the measures to be implemented 
by the State to achieve the integration of the mental illness and 
substance abuse services of the State and its political subdivisions 
with the mental illness and substance abuse services that are included 
in the comprehensive benefit package under title I. The plan required 
in the preceding sentence shall meet the conditions described in 
section 3083(b). In addition, each State shall submit to the Secretary 
a report containing the information described in subsection (c) for 
each year in which the State participates under title I up to and 
including the year 2001 or the date on which an unlimited benefit for 
mental illness and substance abuse services is provided, whichever 
occurs later.
 (b) Required Contents of Integration Report.--With respect to the 
provision of items and services relating to mental illness and 
substance abuse, the report of a State under subsection (a) shall, at a 
minimum, contain the following information:
 (1) Information on the number of individuals served by or 
 through mental illness and substance abuse programs 
 administered by State and local agencies and the proportion who 
 are eligible persons under title I.
 (2) Information on the extent to which each health provider 
 furnishing mental illness and substance abuse services under a 
 State program participates or will participate in one or more 
 regional or corporate alliance health plans, and, in the case 
 of providers that do not so participate, the reasons for the 
 lack of participation.
 (3) With respect to the two years preceding the year in 
 which the State becomes a participating State under title I--
 (A) the amount of funds expended by the State and 
 its political subdivisions for each of such years for 
 items and services that are included in the 
 comprehensive benefit package under such title;
 (B) the amount of funds expended for medically 
 necessary and appropriate items and services not 
 included in such benefit package, including medical 
 care, other health care, and supportive services 
 related to the provision of health care.
 (4) An estimate of the amount that the State will expend to 
 furnish items and services not included in such package once 
 the expansion of coverage for mental illness and substance 
 abuse services is implemented in the year 2001.
 (5) A description of how the State will assure that all 
 individuals served by mental illness and substance abuse 
 programs funded by the State will be enrolled in a health plan 
 and how mental illness and substance abuse services not covered 
 under the benefit package will continue to be furnished to such 
 enrollees.
 (6) A description of the conditions under which the 
 integration of mental illness and substance abuse providers 
 into regional and corporate alliances can be achieved, and an 
 identification of changes in participation and certification 
 requirements that are needed to achieve the integration of such 
 programs and providers into health plans.
 (7) If the integration of mental illness and substance 
 abuse programs operated by the State into one or more health 
 plans is not medically appropriate or feasible for one or more 
 groups of individuals treated under State programs, a 
 description of the reasons that integration is not feasible or 
 appropriate and a plan for assuring the coordination for such 
 individuals of the care and services covered under the 
 comprehensive benefit package with the additional items and 
 services furnished by such programs.
 (8) A description of the manner in which the resources that 
 the State and its political subdivisions currently spend on 
 mental health and substance abuse services will be used to 
 facilitate integration.
 (c) Required Contents of Transition Report.--With respect to the a 
report required under this subsection, the report shall, at a minimum, 
contain the following information:
 (1) The amount of funds expended for substance abuse and 
 mental health services by the source of revenue, including, 
 Federal block grant funds, under title XIX of the Public Health 
 Service Act, Federal categorical grant funds, State and local 
 revenues and health plan payments.
 (2) The amount of funds expended for supportive services to 
 individuals enrolled in substance abuse and mental health 
 treatment programs, including transportation, child care, 
 educational and vocational training and coordination with other 
 public systems such as the social service, child welfare and 
 juvenile and criminal justice systems, by source of revenue.
 (3) The amount of funds expended on medically necessary and 
 appropriate items and services not covered or reimbursed in the 
 comprehensive benefit package by source of revenue.
 (4) The amount of funds expended by the State on substance 
 abuse and mental illness services for individuals who are not 
 eligible to receive the comprehensive benefit package pursuant 
 to this Act, and the source of revenue for such services.
 (d) General Provisions.--Reports under subsections (b) and (c) 
shall be provided at the time and in the manner prescribed by the 
Secretary. The Secretary shall also determine what, if any, reports 
shall be submitted in years following the implementation of an 
unlimited benefit for mental illness and substance abuse services.
 (e) Reporting Requirement.--Each State shall report annually to the 
Secretary on the incidence and prevalence of mental illness and 
substance abuse disorders in the prison population, changes in such 
incidence and prevalence in the prison population, and potential 
causative factors with respect to such changes, including an estimate 
of the extent to which the denial of treatment, or the provision of 
inadequate treatment, to individuals with mental illness and substance 
abuse disorders is contributing to the criminal activity of such 
individuals.

PART 2--ASSISTANCE FOR STATE MANAGED MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE 
 PROGRAMS

SEC. 3531. AVAILABILITY OF ASSISTANCE.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall make grants to States for the 
development and operation of comprehensive managed mental health and 
substance abuse programs that are integrated with the health delivery 
system established under this Act. Such programs shall--
 (1) promote the development of integrated delivery systems 
 for the management of the mental health and substance abuse 
 services provided under the comprehensive benefits package;
 (2) give priority to providing services to low-income 
 adults with serious mental illness or substance abuse disorders 
 and children with serious emotional disturbance or substance 
 abuse disorders and provide for the phase-in of such services 
 for all eligible persons within 5 years;
 (3) ensure that individuals participating in the program 
 have access to all medically necessary mental health and 
 substance abuse services;
 (4) promote the linkage of mental health and substance 
 abuse services with primary and preventive health care 
 services; and
 (5) meet such other requirements as the Secretary may 
 impose.
 (b) Exception.--Nothing in this part shall be construed as 
preventing States that have separate administrative entities for mental 
health and for substance abuse services from establishing separate 
comprehensive managed care programs for such services and receiving 
assistance under this part for either or both programs.

SEC. 3532. PLAN REQUIREMENTS.

 In order to receive a grant under this part, a State must have a 
plan for a comprehensive managed mental health and substance abuse 
program which is approved by the Secretary. Such plan shall--
 (1) describe the management, access, and referral structure 
 that the State will use to promote and achieve integration of 
 mental health and substance abuse services with the health 
 delivery system established under this Act for eligible 
 individuals in the State;
 (2) describe how the State will ensure that providers of 
 specialized services will meet appropriate standards and 
 provide assurances that the State has complied with section 
 1504 as it affects mental health and substance abuse services;
 (3) describe payment, utilization review, and other 
 mechanisms that the State will use to encourage appropriate 
 service delivery and management of costs;
 (4) describe uniform patient placement criteria that the 
 State will use to ensure placement in appropriate substance 
 abuse treatment programs;
 (5) describe the processes the State will use to ensure 
 that individuals will continue to have access to treatment 
 through referrals from nonhealth public entities, such as the 
 juvenile or criminal justice systems, or social service 
 systems;
 (6) specify the methods the State will use to ensure that 
 individuals receiving services under the program have access to 
 all medically necessary and appropriate mental health and 
 substance abuse services;
 (7) define terms that will be used by the State in 
 determining the eligibility of individuals for services under 
 the program;
 (8) describe how health plans will use services under the 
 comprehensive managed mental health and substance abuse 
 programs established under this part;
 (9) describe the role of local government in financing and 
 managing the integrated mental illness and substance abuse 
 treatment system;
 (10) describe the sources of funding, including Medicaid 
 and the block grants authorized by title XIX of the Public 
 Health Service Act, that will be used by the State, other than 
 the grant received under this part, to operate the program, and 
 provide the status of any request for a Medicaid waiver made by 
 the State to the Secretary;
 (11) describe how the State provided for broad-based public 
 input in the development of the plan, and the mechanism that 
 will be used for ongoing public comment on and review of 
 amendments to the plan; and
 (12) describe grievance procedures that will be available 
 for individuals dissatisfied with their health plan's 
 participation in the comprehensive managed mental health and 
 substance abuse program, and mechanisms that will be available 
 to review the performance of health plans and fee-for-service 
 arrangements to ensure against under treatment.

SEC. 3533. ADDITIONAL FEDERAL RESPONSIBILITIES.

 The Secretary shall, upon the submission of a State's plan under 
section 3532, ensure the timely consideration of any Medicaid waiver 
requests submitted by the State, affirm that section 1504 has been 
implemented, and ensure the timely implementation of section 
1641(b)(5).

SEC. 3534. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 There are authorized to be appropriated for grants under this part, 
$100,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 2000.

 Subtitle G--Comprehensive School Health Education; School-Related 
 Health Services

 PART 1--HEALTHY STUDENTS-HEALTHY SCHOOLS GRANTS FOR SCHOOL HEALTH 
 EDUCATION

SEC. 3601. PURPOSES.

 It is the purpose of this part--
 (1) to support the development and implementation of 
 comprehensive age appropriate health education programs in 
 public schools for children and youth kindergarten through 
 grade 12; and
 (2) to increase access to preventive and primary health 
 care services for children and youth through school-based or 
 school-linked health service sites in accordance with locally 
 determined needs.

SEC. 3602. HEALTHY STUDENTS-HEALTHY SCHOOLS GRANTS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary 
of Education, shall award grants to State educational agencies in 
eligible States to integrate comprehensive school health education in 
schools within the State, with priority given within States to those 
communities in greatest need as defined by section 3683(a).
 (b) Eligible Uses of Funds.--Funds made available under this 
section shall be used--
 (1) to implement comprehensive school health education 
 programs, as defined in subsection (f)(1) through grants to 
 local educational agencies;
 (2) to provide staff development and technical assistance 
 to local educational agencies, schools, local health agencies, 
 and other community organizations involved in providing 
 comprehensive school health education programs;
 (3) to evaluate and report to the Secretary on the progress 
 made towards attaining the goals and objectives described under 
 subsection (c)(1)(A); and
 (4) to conduct such other activities to achieve the 
 objectives of this subpart as the Secretary may require.
 (c) Application.--An application for a grant under subsection (a), 
shall be jointly developed by the State educational agency and the 
State health agencies of the State involved, and shall contain--
 (1) a State plan for comprehensive school health education 
 programs, that outlines--
 (A) the goals and objectives of the State for 
 school health education programs, and the manner in 
 which the State will allocate funds to local 
 educational agencies in order to achieve these goals 
 and objectives;
 (B) the manner in which the State will coordinate 
 programs under this part with other Federal, State and 
 local health education programs and resources, and 
 school health services;
 (C) the manner in which comprehensive school health 
 education programs will be coordinated with other 
 Federal, State and local education programs (such as 
 programs under titles I, II, and IV of the Elementary 
 and Secondary Education Act of 1965), with the school 
 improvement plan of the State, if any, under title III 
 of the Goals 2000: Educate America Act, and with any 
 similar programs;
 (D) the manner in which the State shall work with 
 State and local educational agencies and with State and 
 local health agencies to reduce barriers to 
 implementing school health education programs;
 (E) the manner in which the State will monitor the 
 implementation of such programs by local educational 
 agencies and establish outcome criteria by which to 
 evaluate their effectiveness in achieving progress 
 towards the goals and objectives described in 
 subparagraph (A);
 (F) the manner in which the State will provide 
 staff development and technical assistance to local 
 educational agencies, and build capacity for 
 professional development of health educators; and
 (G) the manner in which such school health 
 education programs will be, to the extent practicable, 
 culturally competent and linguistically appropriate and 
 responsive to the diverse needs of the students served;
 (2) a description of the respective roles of the State 
 educational agency, local educational agencies, the State 
 health agency and local health agencies in developing and 
 implementing the State's school health education plan and 
 resulting programs;
 (3) a description of the input of the local community 
 (including students and parents) in the development and 
 operation of comprehensive school health education programs;
 (4) an assurance that communities identified in section 
 3683(a) receive priority as locations for comprehensive school 
 health education programs for all grades to the extent that a 
 State does not implement a statewide program; and
 (5) an assurance that grants to local educational agencies 
 under subsection (b)(1) are contingent upon submission by such 
 agencies of a plan consistent with the requirements for the 
 State plan as required under this subsection.
 (d) Waivers of Statutory and Regulatory Requirements.--
 (1) Waivers.-- Except as provided in paragraph (4), upon 
 the request of an entity and under a relevant program described 
 in paragraph (2), the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 and the Secretary of Education may grant to the entity a waiver 
 of any requirement of such program regarding the use of funds, 
 or of the regulations issued for the program by the Secretary 
 involved, if the following conditions are met with respect to 
 such program:
 (A) The Secretary involved determines that the 
 requirements of such program impede the ability of the 
 State educational agency to achieve more effectively 
 the purposes described in section 3601.
 (B) The Secretary involved determines that, with 
 respect to the use of funds under such program, the 
 requested use of the funds by the entity would be 
 consistent with the purposes described in section 3601.
 (C) The State educational agency provides all 
 interested local educational agencies in the State with 
 notice and an opportunity to comment on the proposal 
 and makes these comments available to the Secretary.
 (2) Relevant programs.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the 
 programs described in this subparagraph are the following:
 (A) In the case of programs administered by the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services, the following:
 (i) The program known as the Prevention, 
 Treatment, and Rehabilitation Model Projects 
 for High Risk Youth, carried out under section 
 517 of the Public Health Service Act.
 (ii) The program known as the State and 
 Local Comprehensive School Health Programs to 
 Prevent Important Health Problems and Improve 
 Educational Outcomes, carried out under such 
 Act.
 (B) In the case of programs administered by the 
 Secretary of Education, any program carried out under 
 part B of the Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act of 
 1986, except that a component of such comprehensive 
 school health education must be consistent with the 
 statutory intent and purposes of such Act.
 (3) Waiver period.--A waiver under this paragraph shall be 
 for a period not to exceed 3 years, unless the Secretary 
 involved determines that--
 (A) the waiver has been effective in enabling the 
 State to carry out the activities for which it was 
 requested and has contributed to improved performance 
 of comprehensive health education programs; and
 (B) such extension is in the public interest;
 (4) Waivers not authorized.--The Secretary involved under 
 paragraph (1), may not waive, under this section, any statutory 
 or regulatory requirements relating to--
 (A) comparability of services;
 (B) maintenance of effort;
 (C) parental participation and involvement;
 (D) the distribution of funds to States or to local 
 educational agencies or other recipients of funds under 
 the programs described in paragraph (2);
 (E) maintenance of records;
 (F) applicable civil rights requirements; or
 (G) the requirements of sections 438 and 439 of the 
 General Education Provisions Act.
 (5) Termination of waiver.--The Secretary involved under 
 paragraph (1) shall terminate a waiver under this subsection if 
 the Secretary determines that the performance of the State 
 affected by the waiver has been inadequate to justify a 
 continuation of the waiver or if it is no longer necessary to 
 achieve its original purpose.
 (e) Definitions.--As used in this section:
 (1) Comprehensive school health education.--The term 
 ``comprehensive school health education'' means a planned, 
 sequential program of health education that addresses the 
 physical, emotional and social dimensions of student health in 
 kindergarten through grade 12. Such program shall--
 (A) be designed to assist students in developing 
 the knowledge and behavioral skills needed to make 
 positive health choices and maintain and improve their 
 health, prevent disease and injuries, and reduce risk 
 behaviors which adversely impact health;
 (B) be comprehensive and include a variety of 
 components addressing personal health, community and 
 environmental health, injury prevention and safety, 
 nutritional health, the effects of substance use and 
 abuse, consumer health regarding the benefits and 
 appropriate use of medical services including 
 immunizations and other clinical preventive services, 
 and other components deemed appropriate by the local 
 educational agencies;
 (C) be designed to be linguistically and culturally 
 competent and responsive to the needs of the students 
 served; and
 (D) address locally relevant priorities as 
 determined by parents, students, teachers, and school 
 administrators and health officials.
 (2) Eligible state.--The term ``eligible State'' means a 
 State with a memorandum of understanding or a written 
 cooperative agreement entered into by the agencies responsible 
 for health and education concerning the planning and 
 implementation of comprehensive school health education 
 programs. Among these States a priority shall be given to 
 qualified States as defined in section 3682(c).
 (3) State educational agency.--The term ``State educational 
 agency'' means the officer or agency primarily responsible for 
 the State supervision of public elementary and secondary 
 schools.
 (4) Local educational agency.--The term ``local educational 
 agency'' means a public board of education or other public 
 authority legally constituted within a State for either 
 administrative control or direction of, or to perform a service 
 function for, public elementary or secondary schools in a city, 
 county, township, school district, or other political 
 subdivision of a State, or such combination of school districts 
 or counties as are recognized in a State as an administrative 
 agency for its public elementary or secondary schools. Such 
 term includes any other public institution or agency having 
 administrative control and direction of a public elementary or 
 secondary school.
 (f) Authorized Funding.--For the purpose of carrying out this 
section, out of the funds available under section 3695(b)(2), there are 
made available, not to exceed $15,000,000 for fiscal year 1995, 
$20,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, 
$30,000,000 for fiscal year 1998, $40,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, and 
$50,000,000 for fiscal year 2000.

SEC. 3603. HEALTHY STUDENTS-HEALTHY SCHOOLS INTERAGENCY TASK FORCE.

 (a) Establishment.--Not later than 120 days after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall establish a Healthy 
Students-Healthy Schools Interagency Task Force to be composed of 
representatives of the Office of Disease Prevention and Health 
Promotion, the National Institutes of Health, the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, the Health Resources and Services 
Administration, the Office of School Health Education within the 
Department of Education, and other Federal agencies and departments 
which have responsibility for components of school health and 
education.
 (b) Co-chairpersons.--The Assistant Secretary for Health and the 
Assistant Secretary for Elementary and Secondary Education shall serve 
as co-chairpersons of the task force established under subsection (a).
 (c) Functions and Activities.--The task force established under 
subsection (a) shall--
 (1) review and coordinate all Federal efforts in school 
 health education and health services;
 (2) provide scientific and technical advice concerning the 
 development and implementation of model comprehensive school 
 health education programs and curricula;
 (3) develop model student learning objectives and 
 assessment instruments that shall be made available to all 
 States;
 (4) develop a uniform grant application form (a form that 
 serves as the principal document containing the core 
 information concerning a particular entity) and procedures that 
 may be used with respect to all school health education-related 
 programs (including supplementary information procedures to be 
 implemented when an entity that has already submitted an 
 application form is applying for additional assistance) that 
 require the submission of an application; and
 (5) recommend to the Secretary, for inclusion in the 
 biennial report required by section 3604(2), methods for 
 effectively linking school health education and health services 
 research findings at the Federal level with implementation at 
 the State and local levels.
 (d) Consolidation of Initiatives.--Not later than 12 months after 
the date of enactment of this Act, the task force established under 
subsection (a) shall prepare and submit to the Congress a report 
containing the recommendations of the task force for the consolidation 
of Federal school health education initiatives.

SEC. 3604. DUTIES OF THE SECRETARY.

 The Secretary shall--
 (1) establish and maintain a national clearinghouse, using 
 advanced technologies to the maximum extent practicable, and 
 mechanisms for the diverse dissemination of school health 
 education material, including written, audio-visual, and 
 electronically conveyed information to educators, schools, 
 health care providers, and other individuals, organizations, 
 and governmental entities;
 (2) submit a biennial report to the Committee on Labor and 
 Human Resources of the Senate and the appropriate committees of 
 the House of Representatives on the implementation and 
 contribution of comprehensive school health education programs 
 funded under this part toward achieving relevant National 
 Healthy People 2000 objectives established by the Secretary; 
 and
 (3) encourage coordination among Federal agencies, State 
 and local governments, educators, school health providers, 
 community-based organizations, and private sector entities to 
 support development of comprehensive school health education 
 programs and school health services.

 PART 5--SCHOOL-RELATED HEALTH SERVICES

 Subpart A--Development and Operation

SEC. 3681. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 (a) Funding for School-Related Health Services.--For the purpose of 
carrying out this subpart, there are authorized to be appropriated 
$100,000,000 for fiscal year 1995, $200,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, 
$325,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, $450,000,000 for fiscal year 1998, 
$575,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, and $700,000,000 for fiscal year 
2000.
 (b) Funding for Planning and Development Grants.--Of amounts made 
available under this section, not to exceed $10,000,000 for each of 
fiscal years 1995 and 1996 may be utilized to carry out section 3684.

SEC. 3682. ELIGIBILITY FOR GRANTS.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Planning and development grants.--Entities eligible to 
 apply for and receive grants under section 3684 are--
 (A) State health agencies that apply on behalf of 
 local community partnerships; or
 (B) local community partnerships in States in which 
 health agencies have not successfully applied.
 (2) Operational grants.--Entities eligible to apply for and 
 receive grants under section 3685 are--
 (A) a qualified State as designated under 
 subsection (c) that apply on behalf of local community 
 partnerships; or
 (B) local community partnerships in States that are 
 not designated under subparagraph (A).
 (b) Local Community Partnerships.--
 (1) In general.--A local community partnership under 
 subsection (a)(1)(B) and (a)(2)(B) is an entity that, at a 
 minimum includes--
 (A) a local health care provider, which may be a 
 local public health department, with experience in 
 delivering services to children and youth or medically 
 underserved populations;
 (B) local educational agency on behalf of one or 
 more public schools; and
 (C) one community-based organization located in the 
 community to be served that has a history of providing 
 services to at-risk children and youth.
 (2) Rural communities.--In rural communities, local 
 partnerships should seek to include, to the fullest extent 
 practicable, providers and community-based organizations with 
 experience in serving the target population.
 (3) Parent and community participation.--An applicant 
 described in subsection (a) shall, to the maximum extent 
 feasible, involve broad-based community participation 
 (including parents of the youth to be served).
 (c) Qualified State.--A qualified State under subsection (a)(2)(A) 
is a State that, at a minimum--
 (1) demonstrates an organizational commitment (including a 
 strategic plan) to providing a broad range of health, health 
 education and support services to at-risk youth; and
 (2) has a memorandum of understanding or cooperative 
 agreement jointly entered into by the State agencies 
 responsible for health and education regarding the planned 
 delivery of health and support services in school-based or 
 school-linked centers.

SEC. 3683. PREFERENCES.

 In making grants under sections 3684 and 3685, the Secretary shall 
give priority to applicants whose-communities to be served show the 
most substantial level of need for health services among children and 
youth.

SEC. 3684. PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT GRANTS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary may make grants during fiscal years 
1995 and 1996 to entities eligible under section 3862 to develop 
school-based or school-linked health service sites.
 (b) Use of Funds.--Amounts provided under a grant under this 
section may be used for the following:
 (1) Planning for the provision of school health services, 
 including--
 (A) an assessment of the need for health services 
 among youth in the communities to be served;
 (B) the health services to be provided and how new 
 services will be integrated with existing services;
 (C) assessing and planning for the modernization 
 and expansion of existing facilities and equipment to 
 accommodate such services; and
 (D) an affiliation with relevant health plans.
 (2) recruitment and training of staff for the 
 administration and delivery of school health services;
 (3) the establishment of local community partnerships as 
 described in section 3682 (b);
 (4) in the case of States, the development of memorandums 
 of understanding or cooperative agreements for the coordinated 
 delivery of health and support services through school health 
 service sites; and
 (5) other activities necessary to assume operational 
 status.
 (c) Application for Grants.--To be eligible to receive a grant 
under this section an entity described in section 3682 (a) shall submit 
an application in a form and manner prescribed by the Secretary.
 (d) Number of Grants.--Not more than one planning grant may be made 
to a single applicant. A planning grant may not exceed 2 years in 
duration.
 (e) Amount Available for Development Grant.--The Secretary may 
award not to exceed--
 (1) $150,000 to entities under section 3682(a)(1)(A) and to 
 localities planning for a citywide or countywide school health 
 services delivery system; and
 (2) $50,000 to entities under section 3682(a)(1)(B).

SEC. 3685. GRANTS FOR OPERATION OF SCHOOL HEALTH SERVICES.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary may make grants to eligible entities 
described in section 3682(a)(2) that submit applications consistent 
with the requirements of this section, to pay the cost of operating 
school-based or school-linked health service sites.
 (b) Use of Grant.--Amounts provided under a grant under this 
section may be used for the following--
 (1) health services, including diagnosis and treatment of 
 simple illnesses and minor injuries;
 (2) preventive health services, including health screenings 
 follow-up health care, mental health, and preventive health 
 education;
 (3) enabling services, as defined in section 3461(b), and 
 other necessary support services;
 (4) training, recruitment, and compensation of health 
 professionals and other staff necessary for the administration 
 and delivery of school health services; and
 (5) referral services, including the linkage of individuals 
 to health plans, and community-based health and social service 
 providers.
 (c) Application for Grant.--To be eligible to receive a grant under 
this section an entity described in section 3682(a)(2) shall submit an 
application in a form and manner prescribed by the Secretary. In order 
to receive a grant under this section, an applicant must include in the 
application the following information--
 (1) a description of the services to be furnished by the 
 applicant;
 (2) the amounts and sources of funding that the applicant 
 will expend, including estimates of the amount of payments the 
 applicant will receive from health plans and other sources;
 (3) a description of local community partnerships, 
 including parent and community participation;
 (4) a description of the linkages with other health and 
 social service providers; and
 (5) such other information as the Secretary determines to 
 be appropriate.
 (d) Assurances.--In order to receive a grant under this section, an 
applicant must meet the following conditions--
 (1) school health service sites will, directly or 
 indirectly, provide a broad range of health services, in 
 accordance with the determinations of the local community 
 partnership, that may include--
 (A) diagnosis and treatment of simple illnesses and 
 minor injuries;
 (B) preventive health services, including health 
 screenings and follow-up health care, mental health and 
 preventive health education;
 (C) enabling services, as defined in section 
 3461(b);
 (D) referrals (including referrals regarding mental 
 health and substance abuse) with follow-up to ensure 
 that needed services are received;
 (2) the applicant provides services recommended by the 
 health provider, in consultation with the local community 
 partnership, and with the approval of the local education 
 agency;
 (3) the applicant provides the services under this 
 subsection to adolescents, and other school age children and 
 their families as deemed appropriate by the local partnership;
 (4) the applicant maintains agreements with community-based 
 health care providers with a history of providing services to 
 such populations for the provision of health care services not 
 otherwise provided directly or during the hours when school 
 health services are unavailable;
 (5) the applicant establishes an affiliation with relevant 
 health plans and will establish reimbursement procedures and 
 will make every reasonable effort to collect appropriate 
 reimbursement for services provided; and
 (6) the applicant agrees to supplement and not supplant the 
 level of State or local funds under the direct control of the 
 applying State or participating local education or health 
 authority expended for school health services as defined by 
 this Act;
 (7) services funded under this Act will be coordinated with 
 existing school health services provided at a participating 
 school; and
 (8) for applicants in rural areas, the assurances required 
 under paragraph (4) shall be fulfilled to the maximum extent 
 possible.
 (e) State Laws.--Notwithstanding any other provision in this part, 
no school based health clinic may provide services, to any minor, when 
to do so is a violation of State laws or regulations pertaining to 
informed consent for medical services to minors.
 (f) Limitation on Administrative Funds.--In the case of a State 
applying on behalf of local educational partnerships, the applicant may 
retain not more than 5 percent of grants awarded under this subpart for 
administrative costs.
 (g) Duration of Grant.--A grant under this section shall be for a 
period determined appropriate by the Secretary.
 (h) Amount of Grant.--The annual amount of a grant awarded under 
this section shall not be more than $200,000 per school-based or 
school-linked health service site.
 (i) Federal Share.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (3), a grant for 
 services awarded under this section may not exceed--
 (A) 90 percent of the non-reimbursed cost of the 
 activities to be funded under the program for the first 
 2 fiscal years for which the program receives 
 assistance under this section; and
 (B) 75 percent of the non-reimbursed cost of such 
 activities for subsequent years for which the program 
 receives assistance under this section.
The remainder of such costs shall be made available as provided in 
paragraph (2).
 (2) Form of non-federal share.--The non-Federal share 
 required by paragraph (1) may be in cash or in-kind, fairly 
 evaluated, including facilities, equipment, personnel, or 
 services, but may not include amounts provided by the Federal 
 Government. In-kind contributions may include space within a 
 school facilities, school personnel, program use of school 
 transportation systems, outposted health personnel, and 
 extension of health provider medical liability insurance.
 (3) Waiver.--The Secretary may waive the requirements of 
 paragraph (1) for any year in accordance with criteria 
 established by regulation. Such criteria shall include a 
 documented need for the services provided under this section 
 and an inability of the grantee to meet the requirements of 
 paragraph (1) despite a good faith effort.
 (j) Training and Technical Assistance.--Entities that receive 
assistance under this section may use not to exceed 10 percent of the 
amount of such assistance to provide staff training and to secure 
necessary technical assistance. To the maximum extent feasible, 
technical assistance should be sought through local community-based 
entities. The limitation contained in this subsection shall apply to 
individuals employed to assist in obtaining funds under this part. 
Staff training should include the training of teachers and other school 
personnel necessary to ensure appropriate referral and utilization of 
services, and appropriate linkages between class-room activities and 
services offered.
 (k) Report and Monitoring.--The Secretary will submit to the 
Committee on Labor and Human Resources in the Senate and the Committee 
on Energy and Commerce in the House of Representatives a biennial 
report on the activities funded under this Act, consistent with the 
ongoing monitoring activities of the Department. Such reports are 
intended to advise the relevant Committees of the availability and 
utilization of services, and other relevant information about program 
activities.

 Subpart B--Capital Costs of Developing Projects

SEC. 3691. FUNDING.

 Amounts available to the Secretary under section 3412 for the 
purpose of carrying out subparts B and C of part 2 of subtitle E are, 
in addition to such purpose, available to the Secretary for the purpose 
of carrying out this subpart.

 Subtitle H--Public Health Service Initiative

SEC. 3695. PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE INITIATIVE.

 (a) In General.--Subject to subsection (c), the Secretary of Health 
and Human Services shall pay, from funds in the Treasury not otherwise 
appropriated, individuals and entities that are eligible to receive 
assistance pursuant to the provisions referred to in paragraphs (1) 
through (13) of subsection (b), to the extent of the amounts specified 
under subsection (b).
 (b) Amounts Specified.--The amounts specified in subsection (a) 
with respect to a fiscal year shall be--
 (1) with respect to the health services research activities 
 authorized under the amendments made by section 3202, 
 $150,000,000 for fiscal year 1995, $400,000,000 for fiscal year 
 1996, $500,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, and $600,000,000 for 
 each of the fiscal years 1998 through 2000;
 (2) with respect to the core functions of public health 
 programs authorized under part 2 of subtitle D of title III, 
 $150,000,000 for fiscal year 1995, $225,000,000 for fiscal year 
 1996, $325,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, $425,000,000 for 
 fiscal year 1998, $500,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, and 
 $625,000,000 for fiscal year 2000;
 (3) with respect to the national initiatives regarding 
 health promotion and disease prevention under part 3 of 
 subtitle D of title III, $125,000,000 for each of the fiscal 
 years 1996 through 1998, and $150,000,000 for each of the 
 fiscal years 1999 and 2000;
 (4) with respect to occupational injury and illness 
 prevention under section 3903, $150,000,000 for each of the 
 fiscal years 1995 through 2000;
 (5) with respect to activities for the development of plans 
 and networks under subpart B of part 2 of subtitle E of title 
 III--
 (A) $52,500,000 for fiscal year 1995, $122,500,000 
 for fiscal year 1996, $192,500,000 for fiscal year 
 1997, $157,500,000 for fiscal year 1998, $122,500,000 
 for fiscal year 1999, and $52,500,000 for fiscal year 
 2000; and
 (B) with respect to awards to federally qualified 
 health centers (as defined in section 1861(aa)(4) of 
 the Social Security Act) under such subpart, 
 $97,500,000 for fiscal year 1995, $227,500,000 for 
 fiscal year 1996, $357,500,000 for fiscal year 1997, 
 $292,500,000 for fiscal year 1998, $227,500,000 for 
 fiscal year 1999, and $97,500,000 for fiscal year 2000;
 (6) with respect to capital costs under subpart C of part 2 
 of subtitle E of title III, $50,000,000 for each of the fiscal 
 years 1995 through 2000;
 (7) with respect to enabling services under subpart D of 
 part 2 of subtitle E of title III--
 (A) $35,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, $140,000,000 
 for each of the fiscal years 1997 through 1999, and 
 $175,000,000 for fiscal year 2000; and
 (B) with respect to awards to federally qualified 
 health centers (as defined in section 1861(aa)(4) of 
 the Social Security Act) under such subpart, 
 $65,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, $260,000,000 for each 
 of the fiscal years 1997 through 1999, and $325,000,000 
 for fiscal year 2000;
 (8) with respect to supplemental services under subpart D 
 of part 1 of subtitle E of title III, $100,000,000 for fiscal 
 year 1995, $150,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, and $250,000,000 
 for each of the fiscal years 1997 through 2000;
 (9) with respect to the National Health Service Corps 
 program referred to under section 3471, $150,000,000 for each 
 of the fiscal years 1996 and 1997, and $250,000,000 for each of 
 the fiscal years 1998 through 2000;
 (10) with respect to school-related health service programs 
 under subpart A of part 5 of subtitle G of title III, 
 $100,000,000 for fiscal year 1995, $200,000,000 for fiscal year 
 1996, $325,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, and $450,000,000 for 
 fiscal year 1998, $575,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, and 
 $700,000,000 for fiscal year 2000;
 (11) with respect to the development and operation of 
 comprehensive managed mental health and substance abuse 
 programs under section 3534, $100,000,000 for each of the 
 fiscal years 1995 through 2000;
 (12) with respect to programs of the Secretary of Health 
 and Human Services under section 3081, $100,000,000 for each of 
 the fiscal years 1995 and 1996, and $150,000,000 for each of 
 the fiscal years 1997 through 2000; and
 (13) with respect to programs of the Secretary of Labor 
 under section 3082, $200,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 
 1995 through 2000.
 (c) Authority to Transfer Funds.--The Committee on Appropriations 
of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Appropriations of 
the Senate, acting through appropriations Acts, may transfer the 
amounts specified under subsection (b) in each fiscal year among the 
programs referred to in such subsection.

 Subtitle I--Additional Provisions Regarding Public Health

SEC. 3901. CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION REGARDING DOMESTIC 
 VIOLENCE AND WOMEN'S HEALTH.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall make grants to eligible 
entities for the purpose of implementing and developing for trainees a 
curriculum that includes training in identification, treatment and 
referral of victims of domestic violence and women's health needs.
 (b) Eligible Entities.--For purposes of subsection (a), eligible 
entities are any school of medicine, school of osteopathic medicine, 
school of public health, graduate program in mental health practice, 
school of nursing as defined in section 853 of the Public Health 
Service Act, a program to train physician assistants, a program for 
training allied health professionals, and a program for training of 
family medicine physicians, general internists, general pediatricians, 
geriatricians, and obstetrician/gynecologists.
 (c) Curriculum.--A curriculum developed under this section shall 
include--
 (1) identification of victims of domestic violence and 
 maintaining complete medical records that include documentation 
 of the examination, treatment provided, and referral made and 
 recording the location and nature of the victim's injuries;
 (2) examining and treating such victims within the scope of 
 the health professional's discipline, training, and practice, 
 including at a minimum providing medical advice regarding the 
 dynamics and nature of domestic violence;
 (3) referring the victims to public and nonprofit entities 
 that provide support services for such victims;
 (4) training in the identification and diagnosis of 
 diseases afflicting women and other medical disorders as they 
 affect women;
 (5) training in the treatment of such diseases and 
 disorders with emphasis on the unique needs of women; and
 (6) research into the causes of such diseases and 
 disorders, including determination of appropriate means of 
 prevention.
 (d) Allocation of Appropriations.--Of the amounts made available 
under section 3301(b) for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall reserve 
not to exceed $20,000,000 for a fiscal year for carrying out this 
section.

 Subtitle J--Occupational Safety and Health

SEC. 3903. OCCUPATIONAL INJURY AND ILLNESS PREVENTION.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services and the 
Secretary of Labor shall work together to develop and implement a 
comprehensive program to expand and coordinate initiatives to prevent 
occupational injuries and illnesses.
 (b) Secretary of Labor.--The Secretary of Labor after consultation 
with the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall directly or by 
grants or contracts--
 (1) provide for training and education programs for 
 employees and employers in the recognition and control of 
 workplace hazards and methods and measures to prevent 
 occupational injuries and illnesses;
 (2) develop model educational materials for training and 
 educating employees and employers on the recognition and 
 control of workplace hazards, including a core curriculum for 
 general safety and health training and materials related to 
 specific safety and health hazards; and
 (3) provide programs and services for technical assistance 
 to employers and employees on the recognition and control of 
 workplace safety and health hazards including programs for 
 onsite consultation.
Technical assistance and consultative services under paragraph (3) 
shall be provided in a manner that is separate from the enforcement 
programs conducted by the Secretary of Labor.
 (c) Secretary of Health and Human Services.--The Secretary of 
Health and Human Services after consultation with the Secretary of 
Labor shall directly or by grants or contracts--
 (1) provide education programs for training occupational 
 safety and health professionals including professionals in the 
 fields of occupational medicine, occupational health nursing, 
 industrial hygiene, safety engineering, toxicology and 
 epidemiology;
 (2) provide education programs for other health 
 professionals and health care providers and the public to 
 improve the recognition, treatment and prevention of 
 occupationally related injuries and illnesses;
 (3) conduct surveillance programs to identify patterns and 
 to determine the prevalence of occupational illnesses, injuries 
 and deaths related to exposure to particular safety and health 
 hazards;
 (4) conduct investigations and evaluations to determine if 
 workplace exposures to toxic chemicals, harmful physical agents 
 or potentially hazardous conditions pose a risk to exposed 
 employees; and
 (5) conduct research, demonstrations and experiments 
 relating to occupational safety and health to identify the 
 causes of and major factors contributing to occupational 
 illnesses and injuries.
 (d) National Advisory Board.--
 (1) Establishment.--There is established a National 
 Advisory Board for Occupational Injury and Illness Prevention 
 to provide oversight, advice and direction on the occupational 
 injury and illness prevention programs and initiatives 
 conducted by the Secretary of Labor and Secretary of Health and 
 Human Services.
 (2) Composition.--The Board shall be composed of 10 members 
 appointed by the Secretary of Labor, 5 of whom are to be 
 designated by the Secretary of Health and Human Services. Such 
 members shall be composed of representatives of employers, 
 employees, and occupational safety and health professionals.
 (e) Director of NIOSH.--The responsibilities of the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services established under this section shall be 
carried out by the Director of the National Institute for Occupational 
Safety and Health.
 (f) Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purposes of carrying 
out this section there are authorized to be appropriated $150,000,000 
for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 2000

 Subtitle K--Full Funding for WIC

SEC. 3905. FULL FUNDING FOR WIC.

 Section 17 of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 U.S.C. 1786) is 
amended--
 (1) in the second sentence of subsection (a)--
 (A) by striking ``authorized'' and inserting 
 ``established''; and
 (B) by striking ``, up to the authorization levels 
 set forth in subsection (g) of this section,'' and 
 inserting ``, up to the levels made available under 
 this section,'';
 (2) in subsection (c)--
 (A) in the first sentence of paragraph (1), by 
 striking ``may'' and inserting ``shall'';
 (B) in paragraph (2), by striking ``appropriated'' 
 and inserting ``made available'';
 (3) in subsection (g)--
 (A) by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the 
 following new paragraph:
 ``(1)(A) There are authorized to be--
 ``(i) appropriated to carry out this section such amounts 
 as are necessary for each of fiscal years 1995 through 2000; 
 and
 ``(ii) made available such amounts as are necessary for the 
 Secretary of the Treasury to fulfill the requirements of 
 subparagraph (B).
 ``(B)(i) Out of any money in the Treasury not otherwise 
appropriated, the Secretary of the Treasury shall provide to the 
Secretary of Agriculture, on January 1 of each fiscal year, to carry 
out this subsection--
 ``(I) $254,000,000 for fiscal year 1996;
 ``(II) $407,000,000 for fiscal year 1997;
 ``(III) $384,000,000 for fiscal year 1998;
 ``(IV) $398,000,000 for fiscal year 1999; and
 ``(V) $411,000,000 for fiscal year 2000.
 ``(ii) The Secretary of Agriculture shall be entitled to receive 
the funds and shall accept the funds.
 ``(C) In lieu of obligating the funds made available under 
subparagraph (B) to carry out this subsection, if the amount 
appropriated (in addition to the amount appropriated under subparagraph 
(B)(i)) to carry out this subsection for--
 ``(i) fiscal year 1996 is less than $3,660,000,000, the 
 amount referred to in subparagraph (B)(i)(I) shall be obligated 
 by the Secretary, during the period beginning December 31, 
 1995, and ending June 30, 1996, to increase the special 
 assistance factor prescribed under section 11(a) of the 
 National School Lunch Act (42 U.S.C. 1759a(a)) for free lunches 
 served under the school lunch program (as established under 
 section 4 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1753));
 ``(ii) fiscal year 1997 is less than $3,759,000,000, the 
 amount referred to in subparagraph (B)(i)(II) shall be 
 obligated by the Secretary, during the period beginning 
 December 31, 1996, and ending June 30, 1997, to increase the 
 special assistance factor prescribed under section 11(a) of 
 such Act for free lunches served under the school lunch program 
 (as established under section 4 of such Act);
 ``(iii) fiscal year 1998 is less than $3,861,000,000, the 
 amount referred to in subparagraph (B)(i)(III) shall be 
 obligated by the Secretary, during the period beginning 
 December 31, 1997, and ending June 30, 1998, to increase the 
 special assistance factor prescribed under section 11(a) of 
 such Act for free lunches served under the school lunch program 
 (as established under section 4 of such Act);
 ``(iv) fiscal year 1999 is less than $3,996,000,000, the 
 amount referred to in subparagraph (B)(i)(IV) shall be 
 obligated by the Secretary, during the period beginning 
 December 31, 1998, and ending June 30, 1999, to increase the 
 special assistance factor prescribed under section 11(a) of 
 such Act for free lunches served under the school lunch program 
 (as established under section 4 of such Act); and
 ``(v) fiscal year 2000 is less than $4,136,000,000, the 
 amount referred to in subparagraph (B)(i)(V) shall be obligated 
 by the Secretary, during the period beginning December 31, 
 1999, and ending June 30, 2000, to increase the special 
 assistance factor prescribed under section 11(a) of such Act 
 for free lunches served under the school lunch program (as 
 established under section 4 of such Act).
 ``(D) Any increase in the special assistance factor prescribed 
under section 11(a) of such Act as a result of subparagraph (C) shall 
not affect any annual adjustment in the factor under section 11(a)(3) 
of such Act.'';
 (B) in the first sentence of paragraph (4), by 
 striking ``appropriated'' and inserting ``made 
 available''; and
 (C) in paragraph (5), by striking ``appropriated'' 
 and inserting ``made available'';
 (4) in subsection (h)--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) in subparagraph (A), by striking 
 ``appropriated'' both places it appears and 
 inserting ``made available''; and
 (ii) in subparagraph (C), by striking 
 ``appropriated'' both places it appears and 
 inserting ``made available''; and
 (B) in the first sentence of paragraph (2)(A), by 
 striking ``1990, 1991, 1992, 1993 and 1994'' and 
 inserting ``1990 through 2000''; and
 (5) in subsection (l), by striking ``funds appropriated'' 
 and inserting ``funds made available''.

 Subtitle L--Border Health Improvement

SEC. 3908. BORDER HEALTH COMMISSION.

 (a) Establishment.--The President is authorized and encouraged to 
conclude an agreement with Mexico to establish a binational commission 
to be known as the United States-Mexico Border Health Commission.
 (b) Duties.--It should be the duty of the Commission--
 (1) to conduct a comprehensive needs assessment in the 
 United States-Mexico Border Area for the purposes of 
 identifying, evaluating, preventing, and resolving health 
 problems and potential health problems that affect the general 
 population of the area;
 (2) to develop and implement a comprehensive plan for 
 carrying out the actions recommended by the needs assessment 
 through--
 (A) assisting in the coordination of public and 
 private efforts to prevent potential health problems 
 and resolve existing health problems;
 (B) assisting in the coordination of public and 
 private efforts to educate the population, in a 
 culturally competent manner, concerning such potential 
 and existing health problems; and
 (C) developing and implementing culturally 
 competent programs to prevent and resolve such health 
 problems and to educate the population, in a culturally 
 competent manner, concerning such health problems where 
 a new program is necessary to meet a need that is not 
 being met through other public or private efforts; and
 (3) to formulate recommendations to the Governments of the 
 United States and Mexico concerning a fair and reasonable 
 method by which the government of one country could reimburse a 
 public or private person in the other country for the cost of a 
 health care service that such person furnishes to a citizen or 
 resident alien of the first country who is unable, through 
 insurance or otherwise, to pay for the service.
 (c) Other Authorized Functions.--In addition to the duties 
described in subsection (b), the Commission should be authorized to 
perform the following functions as the Commission determines to be 
appropriate--
 (1) to conduct or support investigations, research, or 
 studies designed to identify, study, and monitor, on an on-
 going basis, health problems that affect the general population 
 in the United States-Mexico Border Area;
 (2) to conduct or support a binational, public-private 
 effort to establish a comprehensive and coordinated system, 
 which uses advanced technologies to the maximum extent 
 possible, for gathering health-related data and monitoring 
 health problems in the United States-Mexico Border Area; and
 (3) to provide financial, technical, or administrative 
 assistance to public or private persons who act to prevent or 
 resolve such problems or who educate the population concerning 
 such health problems.
 (d) Membership.--
 (1) Number and appointment of united states section.--The 
 United States section of the Commission should be composed of 
 13 members. The section should consist of the following 
 members:
 (A) The Secretary of Health and Human Services or 
 the Secretary's delegate.
 (B) The commissioners of health or chief health 
 officer from the States of Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, 
 and California or such commissioners' delegates.
 (C) Two individuals residing in United States-
 Mexico Border Area in each of the States of Texas, New 
 Mexico, Arizona, and California who are nominated by 
 the chief executive officer of the respective States 
 and appointed by the President from among individuals--
 (i) who have a demonstrated interest or 
 expertise in health issues of the United 
 States-Mexico Border Area; and
 (ii) whose name appears on a list of 6 
 nominees submitted to the President by the 
 chief executive officer of the State where the 
 nominee resides.
 (2) Commissioner.--The Commissioner of the United States 
 section of the Commission should be the Secretary of Health and 
 Human Services or such individual's delegate to the Commission. 
 The Commissioner should be the leader of the section.
 (3) Compensation.--Members of the United States section of 
 the Commission who are not employees of the United States--
 (A) shall each receive compensation at a rate of 
 not to exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate 
 of basic pay payable for positions at GS-15 of the 
 General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, United 
 States Code, for each day such member is engaged in the 
 actual performance of the duties of the Commission; and
 (B) shall be allowed travel expenses, including per 
 diem in lieu of subsistence at rates authorized for 
 employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 
 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their 
 homes or regular places of business in the performance 
 of services of the Commission.
 (e) Regional Offices.--The Commission should designate or establish 
one border health office in each of the States of Texas, New Mexico, 
Arizona, and California. Such office should be located within the 
United States-Mexico Border Area, and should be coordinated with--
 (1) State border health offices; and
 (2) local nonprofit organizations designated by the State's 
 governor and directly involved in border health issues.
If feasible to avoid duplicative efforts, the Commission offices should 
be located in existing State or local nonprofit offices. The Commission 
should provide adequate compensation for cooperative efforts and 
resources.
 (f) Reports.--Not later than February 1 of each year that occurs 
more than 1 year after the date of the establishment of the Commission, 
the Commission should submit an annual report to both the United States 
Government and the Government of Mexico regarding all activities of the 
Commission during the preceding calendar year.
 (g) Definitions.--As used in this section:
 (1) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the United 
 States-Mexico Border Health Commission.
 (2) Health problem.--The term ``health problem'' means a 
 disease or medical ailment or an environmental condition that 
 poses the risk of disease or medical ailment. Such term 
 includes diseases, ailments, or risks of disease or ailment 
 caused by or related to environmental factors, control of 
 animals and rabies, control of insect and rodent vectors, 
 disposal of solid and hazardous waste, and control and 
 monitoring of air quality.
 (3) Resident alien.--The term ``resident alien'', when used 
 in reference to a country, means an alien lawfully admitted for 
 permanent residence to the United States or otherwise 
 permanently residing in the United States under color of law 
 (including residence as an asylee, refugee, or parolee).
 (4) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services.
 (5) United states-mexico border area.--The term ``United 
 States-Mexico Border Area'' means the area located in the 
 United States and Mexico within 100 kilometers of the border 
 between the United States and Mexico.

 TITLE V--QUALITY AND CONSUMER PROTECTION

 table of contents of title

 TITLE V--QUALITY AND CONSUMER PROTECTION

 Subtitle A--Quality Management and Improvement

Sec. 5001. National Quality Council.
Sec. 5002. National goals and performance measures of quality.
Sec. 5003. Standards and performance measures for health plans.
Sec. 5004. Plan data analysis and consumer surveys.
Sec. 5005. Evaluation and reporting of quality performance.
Sec. 5006. Development and dissemination of practice guidelines.
Sec. 5007. Research on health care quality.
Sec. 5008. Quality improvement foundations.
Sec. 5009. Authorization of appropriations.
Sec. 5010. Role of States in quality assurance.
Sec. 5011. Role of health plans in quality management. 
Sec. 5012. Information on health care providers.
Sec. 5013. Conforming amendments to Public Health Service Act.
 Subtitle B--Information Systems, Privacy, and Administrative 
 Simplification

 Partsubpart a--purpose and definitionsork
Sec. 5101. Purpose.
Secsubpart b--requirements on health care providers and health plans
Sec. 5103. Requirements with respect to certain transactions and data.
Sec. 5104. Availability of standard health care data.
Sec. 5105. Timetables for compliance with requirements.
Sec.subpart c--standards and certification for indexing systems and 
 clearinghouses
Sec. 5108. Establishment of standards.
Sec. 5109. Certification procedure.
Sec. 5110. State operation of indexing systems and clearinghouses.
Sec.subpart d--standards for transactions, data elements, and index 
 markers.
Sec. 5112. General requirements on board.
Sec. 5113. Financial and administrative transactions.
Sec. 5114. Elements of health care data.
Sec. 5115. Index markers.
Sec. 5116. Timetasubpart e--accessing health care data
Sec. 5117. Accessing financial and administrative data in connection 
 with a financial and administrative 
 transaction.
Sec. 5118. Accessing data for authorized purposes.
Sec. 5119. Health information protection organizations.
Sec. 5120. Access by the Board and other Federal agencies.
Sec. 5121. Access to health care data by the States.
Sec. 5122. Length of time data should be accessible.
Sec. 5123. Timetables for subpart f--penaltiesmpliance.
Sec. 5124. General penalty for failure to comply with requirements and 
 standards.
Sec. 5125. Penalties relsubpart g--miscellaneous
Sec. 5126. Imposition of additional requirements.
Sec. 5127. Rules regarding coordination of benefits.
Sec. 5128. Effect on State law.
Sec. 5129. Health care data continuity.
Sec. 5130. Protection of commercial information.
Sec. 5131. Authorizsubpart h--assistance to the board
Sec. 5132. General requirement on Board.
Sec.subpart i--demonstration projects for community-based clinical 
 information systems
Sec. 5135. Grants fosubpart j--health security cards
Sec. 5136. Health security cards.
 subpart a--short title; findings and purposes
Sec. 5160. Short title.
Sec. 5161. Findings subpart b--judicial proceedings
Sesubpart c--limitation on disclosure of protected health information.
Sec. 5163. Definitions.
Sec. 5164. General limitations on disclosure.
Sec. 5165. Authorizations for disclosure of protected health 
 information.
Sec. 5166. Treatment; financial and administrative transactions.
Sec. 5167. Oversight.
Sec. 5168. Next of kin and directory information.
Sec. 5169. Public health
Sec. 5170. Emergency circumstances.
Sec. 5171. Judicial and administrative purposes.
Sec. 5172. Health research.
Sec. 5173. Law enforcement.
Sec. 5174. Subpoenas and warrants.
Sec. 5175. Access procedures for law enforcement subpoenas and 
 warrants.
Sec. 5176. Challenge procedures for law enforcement subpoenas.
Sec. 5177. Access and challenge procedures for subpoenas other than law 
 enforcement subpoenas.
Sec. 5178. Security.
Sec. 5179. Inspection of protected health information.
Sec. 5180. Amendment of protected health information.
Sec. 5181. Accounting for disclosures.
Sec. 5182. Standards for electronic documents and communications.
Sec. 5183. Rights of incompetents.
Sec. 5184. Rights of minors.
Sec. 5185. No liability for permissible disclosures.
Sec. 5186. No liability for institutional review board determinations.
Sec. 5187. Good faith reliance on certification.
Sec. 5188. Civil penalty.
Sec. 5189. Civil action.
Sec. 5190. Relationship to other laws.
Sec. 5191. Prior written consent.
Sec. 5192. Provider identifiable data.
 Part 3--Interim Requirements for Administrative Simplification

Sec. 5195. Standard benefit forms.
 Subtitle C--Remedies and Enforcement

 Part 1--Review of Bensubpart a--general rulesEnrolled Individuals
Sec. 5201. Health plan claims procedure.
Sec. 5202. Review in area complaint review offices of grievances based 
 on acts or practices by health plans.
Sec. 5203. Initial proceedings in complaint review offices.
Sec. 5204. Hearings before hearing officers in complaint review 
 offices.
Sec. 5205. Review by Federal Health Plan Review Board.
Sec. 5206. Civil msubpart b--early resolution programs
Sec. 5211. Establishment of early resolution programs in complaint 
 review offices.
Sec. 5212. Initiation of participation in mediation proceedings.
Sec. 5213. Mediation proceedings.
Sec. 5214. Legal effect of participation in mediation proceedings.
Sec. 5215. Enforcement of settlement agreements.
Sec. 5216. Due process for health care providers.
 Part 2--Additional Remedies and Enforcement Provisions

Sec. 5231. Judicial review of Federal action on State systems.
Sec. 5232. Administrative and judicial review relating to cost 
 containment.
Sec. 5233. Civil enforcement.
Sec. 5234. Priority of certain bankruptcy claims.
Sec. 5235. Private right to enforce State responsibilities.
Sec. 5236. Private right to enforce Federal responsibilities in 
 operating a system in a State.
Sec. 5237. Private right to enforce responsibilities of cooperatives.
Sec. 5237A. Enforcement of consumer protections.
Sec. 5238. Discrimination claims.
Sec. 5239. Nondiscrimination in federally assisted programs.
Sec. 5240. Civil and administration action by essential community 
 provider.
Sec. 5241. Facial constitutional challenges.
Sec. 5242. Treatment of plans as parties in civil actions.
Sec. 5243. Whistleblower protections.
Sec. 5244. General nonpreemption of rights and remedies.
 Subtitle D--Medical Malpractice

 Part 1--Liability Reform

Sec. 5301. Federal tort reform.
Sec. 5302. State-based alternative dispute resolution mechanisms.
Sec. 5303. Limitation on amount of attorney's contingency fees.
Sec. 5304. Reduction of awards for recovery from collateral sources.
Sec. 5305. Periodic payment of awards.
 Part 2--Other Provisions Relating to Medical Malpractice Liability

Sec. 5311. State malpractice reform demonstration projects.

 Subtitle E--Expanded Efforts To Combat Health Care Fraud and Abuse

 Part 1--Improved Enforcement

Sec. 5401. All-payer health care fraud and abuse control program.
Sec. 5402. Establishment of all-payer health care fraud and abuse 
 control account.
Sec. 5403. Use of funds by inspector general.
Sec. 5404. Rewards for information leading to prosecution and 
 conviction.
 Part 2--Civil Penalties and Rights of Action

Sec. 5411. Civil monetary penalties.
Sec. 5412. Permitting parties to bring actions on own behalf.
Sec. 5413. Exclusion from program participation.
 Part 3--Amendments to Criminal Law

Sec. 5421. Health care fraud.
Sec. 5422. Theft or embezzlement.
Sec. 5423. False statements.
Sec. 5424. Bribery and graft.
Sec. 5425. Injunctive relief relating to health care offenses.
Sec. 5426. Grand jury disclosure.
Sec. 5427. Forfeitures for violations of fraud statutes.
 Part 4--Amendments to Civil False Claims Act

Sec. 5431. Amendments to civil false claims act.
 Part 5--Effective Date

Sec. 5441. Effective date.

 Subtitle F--Repeal of Exemption

Sec. 5501. Repeal of exemption for health insurance.

 Subtitle A--Quality Management and Improvement

SEC. 5001. NATIONAL QUALITY COUNCIL.

 (a) Establishment.--Not later than 1 year after the date of 
enactment of this Act, the National Health Board shall establish a 
council to be known as the National Quality Council to oversee a 
performance based program of quality management and improvement 
designed to enhance the quality, appropriateness, and effectiveness of 
health care services and access to such services.
 (b) Appointment.--The National Quality Council shall consist of 15 
members appointed by the President, with the advice and consent of the 
Senate, who are broadly representative of the population of the United 
States and shall include--
 (1) individuals and health care providers distinguished in 
 the fields of medicine, public health, health care quality, and 
 related fields of health services research. Such members shall 
 constitute at least one-third of the Council's membership;
 (2) individuals representing consumers of health care 
 services. Such members shall constitute at least one-third of 
 the Council's membership; and
 (3) other individuals representing purchasers of health 
 care; health plans; States; and nationally recognized health 
 care accreditation organizations.
 (c) Duties.--The National Quality Council shall:
 (1) develop national goals and performance measures of 
 quality;
 (2) develop uniform quality goals and performance measures 
 for plans;
 (3) design and oversee national surveys of plans and 
 consumers;
 (4) design and oversee the production of Consumer Report 
 Cards;
 (5) establish and oversee State-based Quality Improvement 
 Foundations; and
 (6) evaluate the impact of the implementation of this Act 
 on the quality of health care services in the United States and 
 the access of consumers to such services.
 (d) Consultation.--In carrying out these duties, the National 
Quality Council shall establish a process of consultation with 
appropriate interested parties.
 (e) Terms.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), 
 members of the Council shall serve for a term of 4 years.
 (2) Staggered rotation.--Of the members first appointed to 
 the Council under subsection (b), the President shall appoint 
 members to serve for a term of between 1 and 4 years so that no 
 more than one third of the Council seats are vacated each year.
 (3) Service beyond term.--A member of the Council may 
 continue to serve after the expiration of the term of the 
 member until a successor is appointed.
 (f) Vacancies.--If a member of the Council does not serve the full 
term applicable under subsection (e), the individual appointed to fill 
the resulting vacancy shall be appointed for the remainder of the term 
of the predecessor of the individual.
 (g) Chair.--The President shall designate an individual to serve as 
the chair of the Council.
 (h) Meetings.--The Council shall meet not less than once during 
each 4-month period and shall otherwise meet at the call of the 
President or the chair.
 (i) Compensation and Reimbursement of Expenses.--Members of the 
Council shall receive compensation for each day (including travel time) 
engaged in carrying out the duties of the Council. Such compensation 
may not be in an amount in excess of the maximum rate of basic pay 
payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of 
title 5, United States Code.
 (j) Conflicts of Interest.--Members of the Council shall disclose 
upon appointment to the Council or at any subsequent time that it may 
occur, conflicts of interest.
 (k) Staff.--The National Health Board shall provide to the Council 
such staff, information, and other assistance as may be necessary to 
carry out the duties of the Council.
 (l) Health Care Provider.--For purposes of this subtitle, the term 
``health care provider'' means an individual who, or entity that, 
provides an item or service to an individual that is covered under the 
health plan (as defined in section 1500) in which the individual is 
enrolled.

SEC. 5002. NATIONAL GOALS AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES OF QUALITY.

 (a) In General.--The National Quality Council shall develop a set 
of national goals and performance measures of quality for both the 
general population and for population subgroups defined by demographic 
characteristics and health status. The goals and measures shall 
incorporate standards identified by the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services for meeting public health objectives utilizing, but not 
limited to, goals delineated in Healthy People 2000.
 (b) Subject of Measures.--National measures of quality performance 
shall be selected in a manner that provides statistical and other 
information on at least the following subjects:
 (1) Outcomes of health care services and procedures.
 (2) Health promotion.
 (3) Prevention of diseases, disorders, and other health 
 conditions.
 (4) Access to care and appropriateness of care.

SEC. 5003. STANDARDS AND PERFORMANCE MEASURES FOR HEALTH PLANS.

 (a) In General.--The National Quality Council shall establish 
national standards and performance measures for health plans, which may 
be used to assess the provision of health care services and access to 
such services, both for the general population and population subgroups 
defined by demographic characteristics and health status. In subject 
matter areas with which the National Quality Council determines that 
sufficient information and consensus exist, the Council shall establish 
goals for performance by health plans consistent with the national 
goals and performance measures established under section 5002. These 
quality measures shall relate to, at a minimum:
 (1) Access to health care services by consumers, including 
 provider to patient ratios, waiting times for appointments, 
 travel distances, and community involvement and outreach.
 (2) Appropriateness of health care services, including 
 failure to provide appropriate services and continuity of care.
 (3) Consumer satisfaction with care and compliance with 
 members rights, including dissenrollment, referral, patterns of 
 claims denials and out-of-network utilization patterns.
 (4) Quality improvement and accountability, including 
 showing that the plan can continuously monitor and improve the 
 quality of health care provided.
 (5) Provider credentialing and competency.
 (6) Management of clinical, and administrative and 
 financial information.
 (7) Utilization management including criteria for 
 monitoring underutilization, techniques and provider feedback 
 to minimize interference with the provider-patient 
 relationship, and supervision of utilization determinations by 
 qualified medical professionals.
 (b) Certification of Plans.--The National Quality Council shall 
provide information and technical assistance to the Board and the 
States on the use of national standards and performance measures in 
this section for State certification of health plans.

SEC. 5004. PLAN DATA ANALYSIS AND CONSUMER SURVEYS.

 (a) In General.--The National Quality Council shall conduct (either 
directly or through contract) periodic surveys of health care consumers 
and plans to gather information concerning the quality measures 
established in sections 5002 and 5003. The surveys shall monitor 
consumer reaction to the implementation of this Act and, in 
coordination with relevant data from health plans and other sources, be 
designed to assess the impact of this Act both for the general 
population of the United States and for populations vulnerable to 
discrimination or to receiving inadequate care due to health status, 
demographic characteristics, or geographic location.
 (b) Survey Administration and Data Analysis.--The National Quality 
Council shall approve a standard design for the consumer surveys and 
sampling of relevant plan data which shall be administered by the 
Administrator for Health Care Policy and Research or such other 
appropriate entity the Council shall designate on a plan-by-plan and 
State-by-State basis. Sufficient consumer survey and plan data shall be 
collected and verified to provide for reliable and valid analysis. A 
State may add survey questions on quality measures of local interest to 
surveys conducted in the State. The plan-level survey shall include a 
subset of consumer survey responses related to consumer satisfaction, 
perceived health status, access, and such other survey items designated 
by the Council.
 (c) Sampling Strategies.--The National Quality Council shall 
approve sampling strategies that ensure that appropriate survey samples 
adequately measure populations that are considered to be at risk of 
receiving inadequate health care or may be difficult to reach through 
consumer-sampling methods, including individuals who--
 (1) fail to enroll in a health plan;
 (2) resign from a plan; or
 (3) are vulnerable to discrimination or to receiving 
 inadequate care due to health status, demographic 
 characteristics, or geographic location.
 (d) Survey Integration.--To the extent feasible, the consumer and 
plan surveys shall be integrated with existing Federal surveys.

SEC. 5005. EVALUATION AND REPORTING OF QUALITY PERFORMANCE.

 (a) Performance Reports.--
 (1) Health plan reports.--Each State annually shall publish 
 and make available to the public a performance report in a 
 standard format, designated by the National Quality Council, 
 outlining the performance of each health plan offered in the 
 State, on the set of national measures of quality performance 
 in section 5002 and 5003. The report shall include the results 
 of a smaller number of such measures for health care providers 
 if the available information is statistically meaningful. The 
 report shall also include the results of consumer surveys 
 described in section 5004 that were conducted in the State 
 during the year that is the subject of the report and be based 
 on the data collected and analyzed in section 5004.
 (2) Consumer Report Cards.--The health plan reports shall 
 be summarized in a consumer report card as specified by the 
 National Quality Council and made available by the State to all 
 individuals in the State.
 (3) Quality reports.--The National Quality Council annually 
 shall provide recommendations to the Congress, the National 
 Health Board, and the Secretary a summary report that--
 (A) outlines in a standard format the performance 
 of each State;
 (B) discusses State-level and national trends 
 relating to health care quality; and
 (C) presents data for each State from health plan 
 reports and consumer surveys that were conducted during 
 the year that is the subject of the report.
 (4) State reports.--The National Quality Council annually 
 shall provide to each State a summary report that--
 (A) outlines in a standard format the performance 
 of each health plan;
 (B) discusses State-level and national trends 
 relating to health care quality; and
 (C) presents data for each health plan from health 
 plan reports and consumer surveys that were conducted 
 during the year that is the subject of the report.
 (b) Public Availability of Information in National Practitioner 
Data Bank on Defendants, Awards, and Settlements.--
 (1) In general.--Section 427(a) of the Health Care Quality 
 Improvement Act (42 U.S.C. 11137 (a)) is amended by adding at 
 the end the following new sentence: ``Not later than January 1, 
 1996, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations under which 
 individuals seeking to enroll in health plans under the Health 
 Security Act shall be able to obtain information reported under 
 this part with respect to physicians and other licensed health 
 practitioners participating in such plans for whom information 
 has been reported under this part on repeated occasions.''.
 (2) Access to data bank for point-of-service contractors 
 under medicare.--Section 427(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 11137(a)) is amended--
 (A) by inserting ``to sponsors of point-of-service 
 networks under section 1990 of the Social Security 
 Act,'', and
 (B) in the heading, by inserting ``Related'' after 
 ``Care''.

SEC. 5006. DEVELOPMENT AND DISSEMINATION OF PRACTICE GUIDELINES.

 (a) Development of Guidelines.--The National Quality Council may 
advise the Secretary and the Administrator for Health Care Policy and 
Research on priorities for the development and periodic review and 
updating of clinically relevant guidelines established under section 
912 of the Public Health Service Act.
 (b) Health Service Utilization Protocols.--The National Quality 
Council shall establish standards and procedures for evaluating the 
clinical appropriateness of protocols used to manage health service 
utilization.

SEC. 5007. RESEARCH ON HEALTH CARE QUALITY.

 The National Quality Council may make recommendations to the 
Secretary and the Administrator for Agency for Health Care Policy and 
Research concerning priorities for research with respect to the 
quality, appropriateness, and effectiveness of health care.

SEC. 5008. QUALITY IMPROVEMENT FOUNDATIONS.

 (a) Establishment.--The National Quality Council shall oversee the 
operation of quality improvement foundations to perform the duties 
specified in subsection (c).
 (b) Structure and Membership.--
 (1) Grant process.--The Secretary, in consultation with the 
 States and the Council, shall select a number of regional 
 foundations through a competitive grantmaking process. The 
 Secretary shall allow for foundations to serve only one State 
 if the State so requests.
 (2) Eligible applicants.--Eligible applicants shall meet 
 the following conditions:
 (A) The entity shall be a not-for-profit entity.
 (B) The entity shall have a board which includes--
 (i) representatives of health care 
 providers from throughout the State, including 
 both practicing providers and experts in the 
 field of quality measurement and improvement, 
 which together shall comprise at least one-
 fourth of the advisory board's membership;
 (ii) at least one representative of 
 Academic Health Centers or schools defined in 
 section 799 of the Public Health Service Act, 
 which shall comprise up to one-fourth of the 
 membership;
 (iii) representatives of consumers, who 
 shall comprise one-fourth of the membership; 
 and
 (iv) representatives of purchasers of 
 health care, health plans, the State, and other 
 interested parties.
 (C) Staffing.--Each entity shall have sufficient, 
 competent staff of experts possessing the skills and 
 knowledge necessary to enable the foundation perform 
 its duties.
 (c) Duties.--
 (1) In general.--Each quality improvement foundation shall 
 carry out the duties described in paragraph (2) for the region 
 in which the foundation is located. The foundation shall 
 establish a program of activities incorporating such duties and 
 shall be able to demonstrate the involvement of a broad cross-
 section of the providers and health care institutions 
 throughout the region. A foundation may apply for and conduct 
 research described in section 5007.
 (2) Duties described.--The duties described in this 
 paragraph include the following:
 (A) Collaboration with and technical assistance to 
 providers and health plans in ongoing efforts to 
 improve the quality of health care provided to 
 individuals in the State.
 (B) Population-based monitoring of practice 
 patterns and patient outcomes, and auditing samples of 
 such data to assure its validity.
 (C) Developing programs in lifetime learning for 
 health professionals to improve the quality of health 
 care by ensuring that health professionals remain 
 abreast of new knowledge, acquire new skills, and adopt 
 new roles as technology and societal demands change.
 (D) Disseminating information about successful 
 quality improvement programs, practice guidelines, and 
 research findings, including information on innovative 
 staffing of health professionals.
 (E) Assist in developing innovative patient 
 education systems that enhance patient involvement in 
 decisions relating to their health care.
 (F) Issuing a report to the public regarding the 
 foundation's activities for the previous year including 
 areas of success during the previous year and areas for 
 opportunities in improving health outcomes for the 
 community, and the adoption of guidelines.
 (G) Providing notice to the State or appropriate 
 entity if the foundation finds, after reasonable 
 opportunities for improvement, that a provider or plan 
 appears unwilling or unable to successfully engage in 
 quality improvement activities related to the services 
 described.

SEC. 5009. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 For the purposes of carrying out this subtitle, there are 
authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for fiscal 
years 1995 through 2000.

SEC. 5010. ROLE OF STATES IN QUALITY ASSURANCE.

 Each State shall--
 (1) disseminate to consumers information related to quality 
 and access to aid in their selection of plans in accordance 
 with section 1206;
 (2) disseminate information on the quality of health plans 
 and health care providers contained in reports of the National 
 Quality Council under section 5005;
 (3) ensure through collaboration with the Quality 
 Improvement Foundation that performance and quality standards 
 are continually improved; and
 (4) ensure that educational programs are developed in 
 cooperation with quality improvement foundations to assist 
 consumers in using quality and other information in choosing 
 health plans.

SEC. 5011. ROLE OF HEALTH PLANS IN QUALITY MANAGEMENT.

 Each health plan shall--
 (1) measure and disclose performance on quality measures as 
 designated by this Act;
 (2) furnish information required under subtitle B of this 
 title and provide such other reports and information on the 
 quality of care delivered by health care providers who are 
 members of a provider network of the plan (as defined in 
 section 1502 (h)(3)) as may be required under this Act; and
 (3) maintain quality management systems that--
 (A) use the national measures of quality 
 performance developed by the National Quality Council 
 under section 5003; and
 (B) measure the quality of health care furnished to 
 enrollees under the plan by all health care providers 
 of the plan.

SEC. 5012. INFORMATION ON HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.

 Each State shall make available to consumers, upon request, 
information concerning providers of health care services or supplies. 
Such information shall include--
 (1) the identity of any provider that has been convicted, 
 under Federal or State law, of a criminal offense relating to 
 fraud, corruption, breach of fiduciary responsibility, or other 
 financial misconduct in connection with the delivery of a 
 health care service or supply;
 (2) the identity of any provider that has been convicted, 
 under Federal or State law, of a criminal offense relating to 
 neglect or abuse of patients in connection with the delivery of 
 a health care service or supply;
 (3) the identity of any provider that has been convicted, 
 under Federal or State law, of a criminal offense relating to 
 the unlawful manufacture, distribution, prescription, or 
 dispensing of a controlled substance; and
 (4) the identity of any provider whose license to provide 
 health care services or supplies has been revoked, suspended, 
 restricted, or not renewed, by a State licensing authority for 
 reasons relating to the provider's professional competence, 
 professional performance, or financial integrity, or any 
 provider who surrendered such a license while a formal 
 disciplinary proceeding was pending before such an authority, 
 if the proceeding concerned the provider's professional 
 competence, professional performance, or financial integrity.

SEC. 5013. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT.

 Title IX of the Public Health Service Act is amended--
 (1) in section 903(a)(4) (42 U.S.C. 299a-1(a)(4)), by 
 inserting ``and Quality Improvement Foundations'' after 
 ``health agencies'';
 (2) in section 904(c)(1) (42 U.S.C. 299a-2(c)(1)), by 
 inserting ``the National Quality Council and'' after ``in 
 consultation with'';
 (3) in section 912(b)(4) (42 U.S.C. 299b-1(b)(4))--
 (A) by inserting ``outcomes,'' before ``risks''; 
 and
 (B) by inserting before the semicolon ``to the 
 extent feasible given the availability of unbiased, 
 reliable, and valid data'';
 (4) in section 914 (42 U.S.C. 299b-3)--
 (A) in subsection (a)(2)(B)--
 (i) by inserting ``the National Quality 
 Council,'' after ``shall consult with''; and
 (ii) by inserting before the period ``and 
 relevant sections of the Health Security Act'';
 (B) in subsection (c), by inserting ``Quality 
 Improvement Foundations and other'' after ``carried out 
 through''; and
 (C) in subsection (f)--
 (i) by striking ``to Administrator'' in the 
 subsection heading;
 (ii) by striking ``Administrator'' and 
 inserting ``National Quality Council and the''; 
 and
 (5) in section 927 (42 U.S.C. 299c-6), by adding at the end 
 thereof the following new paragraphs:
 ``(5) The term `National Quality Council' means the Council 
 established under section 5001 of the Health Security Act.
 ``(6) The term ``Quality Improvement Foundations'' means 
 the Foundations established under section 5008 of the Health 
 Security Act.''.

 Subtitle B--Information Systems, Privacy, and Administrative 
 Simplification

 PART 1--NATIONAL HEALTH CARE DATA NETWORK

 Subpart A--Purpose and Definitions

SEC. 5101. PURPOSE.

 It is the purpose of this part to improve the efficiency and 
effectiveness of the health care system by requiring health plans and 
health care providers in the health care system to--
 (1) standardize certain health care transactions and data 
 in a manner established by the Board;
 (2) transmit standard index markers with respect to such 
 standardized data to entities that are certified by the Board; 
 and
 (3) make standardized data electronically available for 
 disclosure as authorized under this subtitle.

SEC. 5102. DEFINITIONS.

 For purposes of this part:
 (1) Certified clearinghouse.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``certified 
 clearinghouse'' means a clearinghouse that is certified 
 under section 5109.
 (B) Clearinghouse.--The term ``clearinghouse'' 
 means a public or private entity that has the ability 
 to--
 (i) process nonstandard health care data 
 into standard health care data; or
 (ii) store standard health care data and 
 make such data available to another entity.
 (2) Certified indexing system.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``certified indexing 
 system'' means an indexing system that is certified 
 under section 5109.
 (B) Indexing system.--The term ``indexing system'' 
 means a public or private entity that stores standard 
 index markers and has the ability to comply with 
 section 5108(b).
 (3) Health care data network.--The term ``health care data 
 network'' means the health care information system that is 
 formed through the application of the requirements under this 
 part.
 (4) Health care provider.--The term ``health care 
 provider'' includes a provider of services (as defined in 
 section 1861(u) of the Social Security Act), a physician, a 
 laboratory (as defined in section 353(a) of the Public Health 
 Service Act), a supplier, and any other person furnishing 
 health care.
 (5) Health information protection organization.--The term 
 ``health information protection organization'' means a private 
 entity or an entity operated by a State that has the capability 
 to access standard health care data through entities in the 
 national health care data network and process such data into 
 data that is non-identifiable health information.
 (6) Health plan.--The term ``health plan'' has the meaning 
 given such term in section 1500 and includes--
 (A) workers compensation or similar insurance 
 insofar as it relates to workers compensation medical 
 benefits (as defined by the Board);
 (B) automobile medical insurance insofar as it 
 relates to automobile insurance medical benefits (as 
 defined by the Board); and
 (C) a Federal, State, or local program that pays 
 for, or provides directly for, the provision of health 
 care.
 (7) Index marker.--The term ``index marker'' means data 
 that indicate the location of specific standard health care 
 data, the unique identifier of the holder of such data, and 
 information necessary to access such data.
 (8) Non-identifiable health information.--The term ``non-
 identifiable health information'' means health care data that 
 is not protected health information as defined in section 5163.
 (9) Protected health information.--The term ``protected 
 health information'' has the meaning given such term in section 
 5163.
 (10) Standard.--The term ``standard'' when referring to a 
 transaction or to data means the transaction or data meets any 
 standard established by the Board under subpart D that applies 
 to such transaction or data.

 Subpart B--Requirements on Health Care Providers and Health Plans

SEC. 5103. REQUIREMENTS WITH RESPECT TO CERTAIN TRANSACTIONS AND DATA.

 (a) Enrollment and Disenrollment Data.--With respect to each 
enrollment and disenrollment transaction, a health plan shall be 
responsible for ensuring the transmission of a standard index marker 
for the standard enrollment and disenrollment data described in section 
5114(a)(1) to a certified indexing system.
 (b) Financial and Administrative Transactions and Data.--
 (1) Financial and administrative transactions.--Any 
 financial and administrative transaction described in section 
 5113 that is conducted by a health care provider or a health 
 plan shall be conducted in accordance with standards 
 established by the Board under such section and the financial 
 and administrative data transmitted in connection with such a 
 financial and administrative transaction shall be standard 
 data.
 (2) Financial and administrative data.--
 (A) In general.--A health plan shall be responsible 
 for ensuring the transmission to a certified indexing 
 system of a standard index marker for any standard 
 financial and administrative data held by a health plan 
 as a result of a financial and administrative 
 transaction.
 (B) Special rule for certain health plans.--In the 
 case of a health plan that does not file claims, such 
 plan shall be responsible for ensuring the transmission 
 to a certified indexing system of a standard index 
 marker for the financial and administrative data 
 determined appropriate by the Board.
 (c) Quality-Related Patient Medical Record Data.--
 (1) In general.--A health care provider (including a health 
 care provider that consists of a health maintenance 
 organization) shall be responsible for ensuring the 
 transmission to a certified indexing system of a standard index 
 marker for the standard quality-related patient medical record 
 data described in section 5114(a)(3).
 (2) Transmission to health plans.--A health care provider 
 may satisfy the requirement under paragraph (1) by transmitting 
 standard quality-related patient medical record data to a 
 health plan. If a health care provider transmits data in 
 accordance with the preceding sentence, the health plan to 
 which such data is transmitted shall be responsible for 
 ensuring the transmission of a standard index marker for such 
 data to a certified indexing system.
 (3) Requirements not applicable to complete medical 
 records.--Nothing in this section shall be construed as 
 preventing a health service provider or health benefit plan 
 from storing and maintaining patient medical records in a form 
 and manner selected by such providers or plans (so long as such 
 providers and plans are able to comply with the reporting 
 requirements of this subtitle).
 (d) Government Required Data.--A health plan or health care 
provider shall be responsible for ensuring the transmission to a 
certified indexing system of a standard index marker for the standard 
Government required data described in section 5114(a)(5).
 (e) Satisfaction of Requirements.--
 (1) Financial and administrative data.--A health care 
 provider or health plan may satisfy the requirement imposed on 
 such provider or plan under subsection (b)(1) by--
 (A) directly transmitting standard financial and 
 administrative data; or
 (B) submitting nonstandard financial and 
 administrative data to a certified clearinghouse for 
 processing into standard data and transmission.
 (2) Index markers.--A health care provider or health plan 
 may satisfy a requirement imposed on such provider or plan 
 under subsection (a), (b)(2), (c), or (d) by--
 (A) transmitting a standard index marker for 
 standard data directly to a certified indexing system; 
 or
 (B) entering into a contract with a certified 
 clearinghouse under which the clearinghouse transmits a 
 standard index marker for such data directly to a 
 certified indexing system.
 (3) Timeliness.--A health care provider or health plan 
 shall be determined to have satisfied a requirement imposed 
 under subsection (a), (b), (c), or (d) only if the action 
 required under such subsection is completed in a timely manner, 
 as determined by the Board.
 (f) Forms Not To Include Patient Medical Records.--Nothing in this 
section shall be construed as giving the National Health Board the 
authority to require the disclosure and transmission of complete 
patient medical records without Congressional approval.
 (g) Enforcement.--The National Health Board shall ensure that the 
requirements of this part are satisfied.

SEC. 5104. AVAILABILITY OF STANDARD HEALTH CARE DATA.

 (a) In General.--A health care provider or health plan shall be 
capable of disclosing all standard health care data with respect to 
which a standard index marker has been transmitted to a certified 
indexing system under section 5103 when such disclosure is authorized 
under part 2.
 (b) Satisfaction.--A health care provider or health plan may 
satisfy the requirement imposed under subsection (a) by--
 (1) being capable of disclosing standard health care data 
 directly; or
 (2) entering into a contract with a certified clearinghouse 
 under which the clearinghouse is capable of disclosing such 
 data.
 (c) Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to 
require a health plan or health care provider to disclose health care 
data under this section.

SEC. 5105. TIMETABLES FOR COMPLIANCE WITH REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) Initial Compliance.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 12 months after the date on 
 which standards are established under subpart D with respect to 
 a type of financial and administrative transaction, a type of 
 data, or index markers for such data a health plan or health 
 care provider shall comply with the requirements of this 
 subpart with respect to such transaction, data, or index 
 marker.
 (2) Additional data.--Not later than 12 months after the 
 date on which the Board makes an addition to a set of health 
 care data under subpart D, a health plan or health care 
 provider shall comply with the requirements of this subpart 
 with respect to such data.
 (b) Compliance with Modified Standards.--
 (1) In general.--If the Board modifies a standard 
 established under subpart D, a health plan or health care 
 provider shall be required to transmit or receive data in 
 accordance with the modified standard at such time as the Board 
 determines appropriate taking into account the time needed to 
 comply due to the nature and extent of the modification.
 (2) Special rule.--In the case of modifications to 
 standards that do not occur within the 12-month period 
 beginning on the date such standards are established, the time 
 determined appropriate by the Board under paragraph (1) shall 
 be no sooner than the last day of the 90-day period beginning 
 on the date such modified standard is established and no later 
 than the last day of the 12-month period beginning on the date 
 such modified standard is established.

SEC. 5106. PREEMPTION OF STATE ``QUILL PEN'' LAWS.

 A requirement under this part or a standard established by the 
Board under this part shall supersede any contrary provision of State 
law, including a provision of State law that requires medical or health 
plan records (including billing information) to be maintained in 
written rather than electronic form, except where the Board determines 
that the provision is necessary to prevent fraud and abuse, with 
respect to controlled substances, or for other purposes.

 Subpart C--Standards and Certification for Indexing Systems and 
 Clearinghouses

SEC. 5108. ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS.

 (a) In General.--The Board shall establish standards with respect 
to the operation of indexing systems and clearinghouses, including 
standards ensuring that--
 (1) such entities develop, operate, and cooperate with one 
 another to form a national health care data network;
 (2) such entities meet all of the requirements under part 2 
 that are applicable to such entities;
 (3) such entities make public information concerning their 
 performance, as measured by uniform indicators such as 
 accessibility, transaction responsiveness, administrative 
 efficiency, reliability, dependability, and any other indicator 
 determined appropriate by the Board;
 (4) such entities have the highest security procedures that 
 are practicable with respect to the processing of health care 
 data; and
 (5) indexing systems meet the additional requirements for 
 such systems described in subsection (b).
 (b) Additional Requirements For Indexing Systems.--The additional 
requirements for indexing systems that are referred to in subsection 
(a)(6) are as follows:
 (1) Indexing standard health care data.--An indexing system 
 shall have the capability to index the standard health care 
 data that is made available to the system.
 (2) Interoperability.--
 (A) Availability of data.--An indexing system shall 
 make any index marker received by such system pursuant 
 to the requirements of subpart B available to all other 
 certified indexing systems operating in the national 
 health care data network.
 (B) Ability to access data.--An indexing system 
 shall have the ability to receive index markers from 
 all other certified indexing systems operating in the 
 national health care data network.
 (3) Rates charged.--The rate that an indexing system 
 applies to a service performed for another indexing system 
 shall not exceed the amount of the weighted average of the 
 rates such system applies to the same service performed for 
 health plans or health care providers.
 (c) Timetable for Establishment.--The Board shall establish 
standards under this section not later than 9 months after the date of 
the enactment of this part.

SEC. 5109. CERTIFICATION PROCEDURE.

 (a) In General.--Not later than 12 months after the date of the 
enactment of this part, the Board shall establish a certification 
procedure for indexing systems and clearinghouses which ensures that 
certified entities are qualified to meet the requirements of this 
subtitle.
 (b) Application.--The procedure established by the Board under 
subsection (a) shall provide that each entity described in such 
subsection desiring to be certified as an indexing system or 
clearinghouse shall apply to the Board for certification in such form 
and in such manner as the Board determines appropriate.
 (c) Audits and Reports.--The procedure established under subsection 
(a) shall provide for audits by the Board and reports by certified 
entities at such intervals as the Board determines appropriate in order 
to monitor compliance with the standards established under section 
5108.
 (d) Recertification.--An indexing system or clearinghouse must be 
recertified under this section at least every 3 years.
 (e) Loss of Certification.--
 (1) Mandatory termination.--If an indexing system or 
 clearinghouse violates a requirement imposed on such system or 
 clearinghouse under part 2, the entity's certification under 
 this section shall be terminated unless the Board determines 
 that appropriate corrective action has been taken.
 (2) Discretionary termination.--If an indexing system or 
 clearinghouse violates a requirement of this part and a penalty 
 has been imposed under section 5124 with respect to such 
 violation, the Board shall review the certification of such 
 system or clearinghouse and may terminate such certification.

SEC. 5110. STATE OPERATION OF INDEXING SYSTEMS AND CLEARINGHOUSES.

 (a) In General.--A State may operate an indexing system or a 
clearinghouse that is certified under section 5109.
 (b) Exclusive State Systems Permitted.--A State operating a 
certified indexing system or a certified clearinghouse may require each 
health plan or health care provider in the State to use such system or 
clearinghouse to satisfy the requirements imposed on such plan or 
provider under subpart B.

SEC. 5111. ENSURING AVAILABILITY OF DATA.

 The Board shall establish a procedure under which health plans and 
health care providers which do not have access to certified indexing 
systems and clearinghouses are able to make health care data available 
to the health care data network in accordance with the purposes of this 
part.

 Subpart D--Standards for Transactions, Data Elements, and Index 
 Markers.

SEC. 5112. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS ON BOARD.

 In establishing standards under this subpart, the Board shall, to 
the maximum extent practicable (consistent with the requirements of 
this Act)--
 (1) require the use of data that are verifiable, timely, 
 accurate, reliable, useful, complete, and relevant;
 (2) establish standards that are consistent with the 
 objective of reducing the costs of providing and paying for 
 health care;
 (3) incorporate standards in use and generally accepted 
 that are recommended by recognized public or private standard 
 setting or development groups, including the American National 
 Standard Institute's ASC X12, the Healthcare Informatics 
 Standards Planning Panel, and the Department of Health and 
 Human Services; and
 (4) promote the development of standards necessary to 
 fulfill the requirements of this Act.
The Board shall insure that new standards are developed in 
collaboration with Federal health agencies, participating States, 
health plans, representatives of providers, employers and consumers, 
experts in public health, and nationally recognized standard setting 
groups.

SEC. 5113. FINANCIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRANSACTIONS.

 (a) In General.--The Board shall establish the standards necessary 
for health care providers and health plans to conduct the following 
transactions relating to the financing or administering of health care:
 (1) Eligibility.
 (2) Payment and remittance advice.
 (3) Claims.
 (4) Encounters.
 (5) Claims status.
 (6) Coordination of benefits.
 (7) First report of injury.
 (8) Claim attachments.
 (9) Referrals, certification, and authorization.
 (10) Any other transactions determined appropriate by the 
 Board.
 (b) Special Rule.--Any standards established by the Board under 
subsection (a) that relate to coordination of benefits shall be 
consistent with the rules and procedures developed by the Board under 
section 5127.

SEC. 5114. ELEMENTS OF HEALTH CARE DATA.

 (a) In General.--The Board shall establish standards necessary to 
make the following health care data uniform and compatible for 
electronic transmission through a national health care data network:
 (1) enrollment and disenrollment data;
 (2) financial and administrative data that the Board 
 determines is appropriate for transmission in connection with a 
 financial and administrative transaction described in section 
 5113;
 (3) a set of quality-related patient medical record data 
 that the Board determines is necessary in order to conduct 
 meaningful quality measurement;
 (4) patient medical record data that is not included in a 
 set of quality-related patient medical record data established 
 by the Board under paragraph (3);
 (5) a set of health care data that is not described in 
 paragraphs (1) through (3) and that is required by the Board, a 
 State, or the National Center for Consumer Advocacy for such 
 entity to perform its functions under this Act.
 (b) Additions.--The Board may make additions to the sets of health 
care data established under paragraphs (1), (2), (3), and (5) of 
subsection (a) as the Board determines appropriate.
 (c) Certain Data Elements.--
 (1) Unique identifiers.--The Board shall establish a system 
 to provide for a unique identifier for each individual, 
 employer, health plan, and health care provider.
 (2) Code sets.--The Board shall select code sets for any 
 appropriate data elements from among the code sets that are 
 maintained by private and public entities such as the American 
 National Standards Institute, the National Uniform Billing 
 Committee, or the Department of Health and Human Services.
 (d) Format of Data Elements.--The Board shall establish standards 
with respect to the format in which data elements shall be transmitted.
 (e) Definitions.--For purposes of this section:
 (1) Definition.--The term ``code set'' means any set of 
 codes used for encoding data elements, including tables of 
 terms, medical diagnostic codes, or medical procedure codes.
 (2) Patient medical record data defined.--The term 
 ``patient medical record data'' means health care data derived 
 from a clinical encounter that relates to the physical or 
 mental condition of an individual and that is not financial and 
 administrative data.
 (3) Quality measurement defined.--The term ``quality 
 measurement'' means monitoring and measuring the quality of 
 health care consistent with the measures established by the 
 National Quality Council under section 5002.

SEC. 5115. INDEX MARKERS.

 The Board shall establish the standards necessary for a health care 
provider or health plan to ensure the transmission of an index marker 
with respect to standard health care data to a certified indexing 
system.

SEC. 5116. TIMETABLES FOR ESTABLISHMENT.

 (a) Initial Standards.--The Board shall establish standards 
relating to--
 (1) financial and administrative transactions not later 
 than 9 months after the date of the enactment of this part 
 (except in the case of standards for claims attachments which 
 shall be established not later than 24 months after the date of 
 the enactment of this part);
 (2) the first set of enrollment data not later than 9 
 months after the date of the enactment of this part;
 (3) financial and administrative data not later than 9 
 months after the date of the enactment of this part (except in 
 the case of standards with respect to data transmitted in 
 connection with claims attachments which shall be established 
 not later than 24 months after the date of the enactment of 
 this part);
 (4) the first set of quality-related patient medical record 
 data not later than 24 months after the date of the enactment 
 of this part;
 (5) patient medical record data that is not included in a 
 set of quality-related patient medical record data not later 
 than 7 years after the date of the enactment of this part;
 (6) the first set of Government required data not later 
 than 9 months after the date of the enactment of this part;
 (7) index markers for standard data not later than 9 months 
 after the date of the enactment of this part; and
 (8) any addition to a set of health care data under this 
 part, in conjunction with making such an addition.
 (b) Modifications to Standards.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 Board shall review the standards established under this subpart 
 no more frequently than every 6 months but at least every 12 
 months, and shall modify such standards as determined 
 appropriate.
 (2) Special rules.--
 (A) Modifications during first 12-month period.--
 The Board shall not modify any standards established 
 under this subpart during the 12-month period beginning 
 on the date such standards are established unless the 
 Board determines that a modification is necessary in 
 order to permit health plans and health care providers 
 to comply with the requirements of subpart B.
 (B) Code sets.--
 (i) Recommended modifications.--The Board 
 shall establish a procedure under which an 
 entity described in section 5114(b)(2)(A) may 
 submit any modification to a code set selected 
 by the Board that is determined appropriate by 
 the entity.
 (ii) Additional rules.--A code set selected 
 by the Board may not be modified more 
 frequently than once annually unless the Board 
 determines that a modification is necessary in 
 order to permit health plans and health care 
 providers to comply with the requirements of 
 subpart B. If such a code set is modified under 
 the preceding sentence, the modified set shall 
 include instructions on how data elements that 
 were encoded prior to such modification are to 
 be converted or translated so as to preserve 
 the value of the elements. Any modification 
 under this subparagraph shall be implemented in 
 a manner that minimizes the disruption and cost 
 to health plans and health care providers of 
 complying with such modification.
 (C) Evaluation of standards.--The Board may 
 establish a process to measure or verify the 
 consistency of standards established or modified under 
 this subpart with the requirements of this Act. Such 
 process may include demonstration projects and analyses 
 of the costs of implementation of such standards and 
 modifications.

 Subpart E--Accessing Health Care Data

SEC. 5117. ACCESSING FINANCIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE DATA IN CONNECTION 
 WITH A FINANCIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRANSACTION.

 The Board shall establish technical standards under which a health 
care provider or health plan may access financial and administrative 
data through entities in the national health care data network in 
connection with a financial and administrative transaction when such 
access is authorized under part 2.

SEC. 5118. ACCESSING DATA FOR AUTHORIZED PURPOSES.

 The Board shall establish technical standards that shall apply to 
any request to access standard health care data that is not described 
in section 5117, including standards relating to access by enrollees, 
through entities in the national health care data network. Such 
technical standards shall provide any such request shall be satisfied--
 (1) if the request is for data that is protected health 
 information and is authorized for disclosure under part 2; or
 (2) if the request is for data that is non-identifiable 
 health information, by obtaining such data through a health 
 information protection organization certified under section 
 5119.

SEC. 5119. HEALTH INFORMATION PROTECTION ORGANIZATIONS.

 (a) Right to Access Data.--The Board shall establish standards 
under which a health information protection organization that is 
certified under subsection (d) may access health care data through 
entities in the national health care data network.
 (b) Limitation on Disclosure.--A health information protection 
organization that is certified under subsection (d) may disclose health 
care data--
 (1) if the data is non-identifiable health information; or
 (2) if the data is protected health care information only 
 when such disclosure is authorized under part 2.
 (c) Standards for Operation.--The Board shall establish standards 
with respect to the operation of health information protection 
organizations, including standards ensuring that such organizations 
have the highest security procedures that are practicable with respect 
to processing health care data.
 (d) Certification by the Board.--
 (1) Establishment.--Not later than 12 months after the date 
 of the enactment of this part, the Board shall establish a 
 certification procedure for health information protection 
 organizations which ensures that certified organizations are 
 qualified to meet the requirements of this section.
 (2) Application.--Each entity desiring to be certified as a 
 health information protection organization shall apply to the 
 Board for certification in a form and manner determined 
 appropriate by the Board.
 (3) Audits and reports.--The procedure established under 
 paragraph (1) shall provide for audits by the Board and reports 
 by an entity certified under paragraph (2) at such intervals as 
 the Board determines appropriate in order to monitor such 
 entity's compliance with the requirements of this section and 
 the standards established by the Board under this section.
 (4) Recertification.--A health information protection 
 organization must be recertified under this subsection at least 
 every 3 years.
 (e) Loss of Certification.--
 (1) Mandatory termination.--If a health information 
 protection organization violates a requirement imposed on such 
 organization under part 2, the organization's certification 
 under this section shall be terminated unless the Board 
 determines that appropriate corrective action has been taken.
 (2) Discretionary termination.--If a health information 
 protection organization violates a requirement of this part, 
 the Board shall review the certification of such organization 
 and may terminate such certification.

SEC. 5120. ACCESS BY THE BOARD AND OTHER FEDERAL AGENCIES.

 (a) In General.--The Board or any other Federal agency may access 
health care data through entities in the national health care data 
network only when authorized under part 2.
 (b) Access Through Health Information Protection Organizations.--
 (1) In general.--Health information protection 
 organizations certified under section 5119 shall make available 
 to the Board or another Federal agency pursuant to a cost 
 reimbursement contract (as defined under the Federal 
 Acquisition Regulation), any health care information that is 
 requested by such agency.
 (2) Certain information available to health information 
 protection organizations at no charge.--If a health information 
 protection organization needs data from a health plan or health 
 care provider in order to comply with a request of the Board or 
 another a Federal agency under paragraph (1) that relates to a 
 requirement on such agency under this Act, such plan or 
 provider shall make such data available to such organization at 
 no charge.
 (c) Disclosure.--
 (1) In general.--Health care data accessed by the Board or 
 another Federal agency under this section shall be disclosed 
 only as authorized under the provisions of this Act.
 (2) Disclosure for public use functions.--The Board and any 
 other Federal agency shall make the non-identifiable health 
 care information accessed by such agency under this section 
 available to private, not-for-profit organizations for public 
 use functions (as determined by the Board through regulations) 
 in an affordable and timely manner.

SEC. 5121. ACCESS TO HEALTH CARE DATA BY THE STATES.

 (a) In General.--The Board shall establish standards under which a 
State may access health care data through entities in the national 
health care data network.
 (b) Access Through Health Information Protection Organizations.--
Health information protection organizations certified under section 
5119 shall make health care data available to the States in accordance 
with section 5119 pursuant to a cost reimbursement contract (as defined 
under the Federal Acquisition Regulation).

SEC. 5122. LENGTH OF TIME DATA SHOULD BE ACCESSIBLE.

 The Board shall establish standards with respect to the length of 
time any specific standard health care data should be accessible 
through the health care data network.

SEC. 5123. TIMETABLES FOR ESTABLISHMENT AND COMPLIANCE.

 (a) Initial Standards.--The Board shall establish standards under 
this subpart not later than 9 months after the date of the enactment of 
this part and such standards shall be effective upon establishment.
 (b) Modifications to Standards.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 Board shall review the standards established under this subpart 
 no more frequently than every 6 months but at least every 12 
 months, and shall modify such standards as determined 
 appropriate by the Board. Any modifications to standards 
 established under this subpart shall be effective upon 
 establishment.
 (2) Special rule.--The Board shall not modify any standards 
 established under this subpart during the 12-month period 
 beginning on the date such standards are established unless the 
 Board determines that a modification is necessary in order to 
 permit compliance with the requirements of this subpart.

 Subpart F--Penalties

SEC. 5124. GENERAL PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH REQUIREMENTS AND 
 STANDARDS.

 (a) In General.--Except as provided in section 5125, the Board 
shall impose on a health plan, health care provider, indexing system, 
or clearinghouse that violates a requirement or standard imposed under 
this part a penalty of not more than $1,000 for each violation. The 
provisions of section 1128A of the Social Security Act (other than 
subsections (a) and (b) and the second sentence of subsection (f)) 
shall apply to the imposition of a civil money penalty under this 
subsection in the same manner as such provisions apply to the 
imposition of a penalty under section 1128A of such Act.
 (b) Limitations.--
 (1) Noncompliance not discovered exercising reasonable 
 diligence.--A penalty may not be imposed under subsection (a) 
 if it is established to the satisfaction of the Board that the 
 person liable for the penalty did not know, and by exercising 
 reasonable diligence would not have known, that such person 
 failed to comply with the requirement or standard described in 
 subsection (a).
 (2) Failures due to reasonable cause.--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraphs (B) and (C), a penalty may not be imposed 
 under subsection (a) if--
 (i) the failure to comply was due to 
 reasonable cause and not to willful neglect; 
 and
 (ii) the failure to comply is corrected 
 during the 30-day period beginning on the 1st 
 date the person liable for the penalty knew, or 
 by exercising reasonable diligence would have 
 known, that the failure to comply occurred.
 (B) Plans and providers.--
 (i) No penalty.--If a health plan or health 
 care provider demonstrates to the Board that a 
 failure to comply occurred because the plan or 
 provider was unable to comply, no penalty may 
 be imposed under subsection (a) until such time 
 as the plan or provider is able to comply.
 (ii) Assistance.--The Board shall provide 
 technical assistance to a health plan or health 
 care provider described in clause (i) to obtain 
 compliance. Such assistance shall be provided 
 in any manner determined appropriate by the 
 Board.
 (C) Indexing systems and clearinghouses.--In the 
 case of an indexing system or clearinghouse, the period 
 referred to in subparagraph (A)(ii) may be extended as 
 determined appropriate by the Board based on the nature 
 and extent of the failure to comply.
 (3) Reduction.--In the case of a failure to comply which is 
 due to reasonable cause and not to willful neglect, any penalty 
 under subsection (a) that is not entirely waived under 
 paragraph (2) may be waived to the extent that the payment of 
 such penalty would be excessive relative to the compliance 
 failure involved.

SEC. 5125. PENALTIES RELATING TO ACCESSING DATA.

 A person who violates a standard established under sections 5117, 
5118, and 5119 shall--
 (1) be fined not more than $50,000, imprisoned not more 
 than 1 year, or both;
 (2) if the offense is committed under false pretenses, be 
 fined not more than $100,000, imprisoned not more than 5 years, 
 or both; and
 (3) if the offense is committed with intent to sell, 
 transfer, or use health care data for commercial advantage, 
 personal gain, or malicious harm, fined not more than $250,000, 
 imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both.

 Subpart G--Miscellaneous

SEC. 5126. IMPOSITION OF ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) In General.--A health plan or health care provider may not 
impose a standard on another plan or provider that is in addition to 
the standards established by the Board under this part unless--
 (1) such plan or provider voluntarily agrees to such 
 standard; or
 (2) a waiver is granted under subsection (b) to establish 
 such standard.
 (b) Conditions for Waivers.--
 (1) In general.--A health plan or health care provider may 
 request a waiver from the Board in order to require another 
 plan or provider to comply with a standard that is in addition 
 to the standards imposed by the Board under this part.
 (2) Consideration of waiver requests.--In determining 
 whether to grant a waiver under this subsection the Board shall 
 consider the value of the data to be exchanged for research or 
 other purposes determined appropriate by the Board, the 
 administrative cost of the additional standard, the burden of 
 the additional standard, and the burden of the timing of the 
 imposition of the additional standard.
 (3) Anonymous reporting.--If a health plan or health care 
 provider attempts to impose a standard in addition to the 
 standards imposed under this part, the plan or provider on 
 which such additional standard is being imposed may contact the 
 Board. The Board shall develop a procedure under which the 
 contacting plan or provider shall remain anonymous. The Board 
 shall notify the plan or provider imposing the additional 
 standard that the additional standard may not be imposed unless 
 the other plan or provider voluntarily agrees to such standard 
 or a waiver is obtained under this subsection.

SEC. 5127. RULES REGARDING COORDINATION OF BENEFITS.

 Not later than 9 months after the date of the enactment of this 
part, the Board shall develop rules and procedures for determining and 
coordinating the financial obligations of health plans when health care 
benefits are payable under 2 or more health plans.

SEC. 5128. EFFECT ON STATE LAW.

 (a) In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), the 
provisions of this part shall supersede any provisions of the law of 
any State to the extent that the provisions of this part conflict with 
such provisions of law.
 (b) Exception.--Nothing in this part shall supersede any provision 
of State law that requires health plans or health care providers to use 
an indexing system or a clearinghouse that is certified under section 
5109 and that is operated by the State to satisfy the requirements 
imposed on such plan or provider under subpart B.

SEC. 5129. HEALTH CARE DATA CONTINUITY.

 (a) Data Held by Health Plans and Providers.--Any health care data 
held by a health plan or health care provider that ceases to function 
shall be obtained by the State in connection with the execution of the 
State's responsibilities under section 1204. The State shall ensure 
that such health care data is transferred to a health plan or health 
care provider under procedures developed by the Board.
 (b) Data Held by Indexing Systems and Clearinghouses.--If an 
indexing system or clearinghouse is decertified or ceases to function 
in a manner that would threaten the continued existence of health care 
data or index markers held by such system or clearinghouse, such data 
or index markers shall be transferred to a certified indexing system or 
clearinghouse designated by the Board.

SEC. 5130. PROTECTION OF COMMERCIAL INFORMATION.

 In establishing standards under this part, the Board shall ensure 
that the trade secrets and confidential commercial information of 
entities operating in the health care data network is protected from--
 (1) use other than as described in this title; and
 (2) release to or access by third parties.

SEC. 5131. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be 
necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 2000, to carry out 
the purposes of this subtitle.

 Subpart H--Assistance to the Board

SEC. 5132. GENERAL REQUIREMENT ON BOARD.

 In complying with any requirements imposed under this part, the 
Board shall rely on recommendations of the Health Care Data Advisory 
Panel established under section 5133 and shall consult with appropriate 
Federal agencies.

SEC. 5133. HEALTH CARE DATA ADVISORY PANEL.

 (a) Establishment.--There is established a panel to be known as the 
Health Care Data Advisory Panel.
 (b) Duty.--The panel shall provide assistance to the Board in 
complying with the requirements imposed on the Board under this part 
and part 2. In performing such duty, the Panel shall receive technical 
assistance from appropriate Federal agencies.
 (c) Membership.--
 (1) In general.--The Panel shall consist of 15 members to 
 be appointed by the President not later than 60 days after the 
 date of the enactment of this part. The Panel shall designate 1 
 member as the Chair.
 (2) Expertise.--The membership of the Panel shall consist 
 of individuals who are of recognized standing and distinction 
 and who possess the demonstrated capacity to discharge the 
 duties imposed on the Panel.
 (3) Terms.--Each member of the Panel shall be appointed for 
 a term of 5 years, except that the members first appointed 
 shall serve staggered terms such that the terms of no more than 
 3 members expire at one time.
 (4) Vacancies.--
 (A) In general.--A vacancy on the Panel shall be 
 filled in the manner in which the original appointment 
 was made and shall be subject to any conditions which 
 applied with respect to the original appointment.
 (B) Filling unexpired term.--An individual chosen 
 to fill a vacancy shall be appointed for the unexpired 
 term of the member replaced.
 (C) Expiration of terms.--The term of any member 
 shall not expire before the date on which the member's 
 successor takes office.
 (5) Conflicts of interest.--Members of the Panel shall 
 disclose upon appointment to the Panel or at any subsequent 
 time that it may occur, conflicts of interest.
 (d) Meetings.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 Panel shall meet at the call of the Chair.
 (2) Initial meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date 
 on which all members of the Panel have been appointed, the 
 Panel shall hold its first meeting.
 (3) Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Panel shall 
 constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold 
 hearings.
 (e) Power To Hold Hearings.--The Panel may hold such hearings, sit 
and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such 
evidence as the Panel considers advisable to carry out the purposes of 
this section.
 (f) Other Administrative Provisions.--Subparagraphs (C), (D), and 
(H) of section 1886(e)(6) of the Social Security Act shall apply to the 
Panel in the same manner as they apply to the Prospective Payment 
Assessment Commission.
 (g) Reports.--
 (1) In general.--The Panel shall annually prepare and 
 submit to Congress and the Board a report on--
 (A) the status of the national health care data 
 network established pursuant to this part, including--
 (i) whether the network is fulfilling the 
 purpose described in section 5101; and
 (ii) information relating to the cost and 
 quality of health care rendered by health care 
 providers;
 (B) the savings and costs of the network; and
 (C) any legislative recommendations related to the 
 network.
 (2) Availability to the public.--Any information in the 
 report submitted to Congress under paragraph (1) shall be made 
 available to the public unless such information may not be 
 disclosed by law.
 (h) Duration.--Notwithstanding section 14(a) of the Federal 
Advisory Committee Act, the Panel shall continue in existence until 
otherwise provided by law.
 (i) Authorization of Appropriations.--
 (1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated 
 such sums as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this 
 section.
 (2) Availability.--Any sums appropriated under the 
 authorization contained in this subsection shall remain 
 available, without fiscal year limitation, until expended.

 Subpart I--Demonstration Projects for Community-Based Clinical 
 Information Systems

SEC. 5135. GRANTS FOR DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS.

 (a) In General.--The Board may make grants for demonstration 
projects to promote the development and use of electronically 
integrated community-based clinical information systems and 
computerized patient medical records.
 (b) Applications.--
 (1) Submission.--To apply for a grant under this subpart 
 for any fiscal year, an applicant shall submit an application 
 to the Board in accordance with the procedures established by 
 the Board.
 (2) Criteria for approval.--The Board may not approve an 
 application submitted under paragraph (1) unless the 
 application includes assurances satisfactory to the Board 
 regarding the following:
 (A) Use of existing technology.--Funds received 
 under this subpart will be used to apply 
 telecommunications and information systems technology 
 that is in existence on the date the application is 
 submitted in a manner that improves the quality of 
 health care, reduces the costs of such care, and 
 protects the privacy and confidentiality of information 
 relating to the physical or mental condition of an 
 individual.
 (B) Use of existing information systems.--Funds 
 received under this subpart will be used--
 (i) to enhance telecommunications or 
 information systems that are operating on the 
 date the application is submitted;
 (ii) to integrate telecommunications or 
 information systems that are operating on the 
 date the application is submitted; or
 (iii) to connect additional users to 
 telecommunications or information networks or 
 systems that are operating on the date the 
 application is submitted.
 (C) Matching funds.--The applicant will make 
 available funds for the demonstration project in an 
 amount that equals at least 50 percent of the cost of 
 the project.
 (c) Geographic Diversity.--In making any grants under this subpart, 
the Board shall, to the extent practicable, make grants to persons 
representing different geographic areas of the United States, including 
urban and rural areas.
 (d) Review and Sanctions.--The Board shall review at least annually 
the compliance of a person receiving a grant under this subpart with 
the provisions of this subpart. The Board shall establish a procedure 
for determining whether such a person has failed to comply 
substantially within the provisions of this subpart and the sanctions 
to be imposed for any such noncompliance.
 (e) Annual Report.--The Board shall include in the annual report 
under section 1705 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300u-4) 
a description of the activities carried out under this subpart.

 Subpart J--Health Security Cards

SEC. 5136. HEALTH SECURITY CARDS.

 (a) Permissible Uses of Card.--A health security card that is 
issued to an eligible individual under section 1001(b) may be used by 
an individual or entity, in accordance with regulations promulgated by 
the Board, only for the purpose of providing or assisting the eligible 
individual in obtaining an item or service that is covered under--
 (1) the applicable health plan in which the individual is 
 enrolled (as defined in section 1902);
 (2) a policy consisting of a supplemental health policy 
 (described in part 2 of subtitle E of title I), a cost sharing 
 policy (described in such part), or both;
 (3) a FEHBP supplemental plan (described in subtitle C of 
 title VIII);
 (4) a FEHBP medicare supplemental plan (described in such 
 subtitle); or
 (5) such other programs as the Board may specify.
 (b) Form of Card and Encoded Information.--The Board shall 
establish standards respecting the form of health security cards and 
the information to be encoded in electronic form on the cards. Such 
information shall include--
 (1) the identity of the individual to whom the card is 
 issued;
 (2) the applicable health plan in which the individual is 
 enrolled;
 (3) any policy described in paragraph (2), (3), or (4) of 
 subsection (a) in which the individual is enrolled; and
 (4) any other information that the Board determines to be 
 necessary in order for the card to serve the purpose described 
 in subsection (a).
 (c) Unique Identifier Numbers.--The unique identifier number system 
developed by the Board under section 5114(b) shall be used in encoding 
the information described in subsection (b).
 (d) Trademark Registration.--The Board shall take appropriate steps 
to ensure the registration of health security cards and other indicia 
relating to such cards as trademarks or service marks (as appropriate) 
under the Trademark Act of 1946. For purposes of this subsection, the 
``Trademark Act of 1946'' refers to the Act entitled ``An Act to 
provide for the registration and protection of trademarks used in 
commerce, to carry out the provisions of international conventions, and 
for other purposes'', approved July 5, 1946 (15 U.S.C. et seq.).

 PART 2--PRIVACY OF INFORMATION

 Subpart A--Short Title; Findings and Purposes

SEC. 5160. SHORT TITLE.

 This part may be cited as the ``Health Care Privacy Protection 
Act''.

SEC. 5161. FINDINGS AND PURPOSES.

 (a) Findings.--The Congress finds as follows:
 (1) The improper disclosure of personally identifiable 
 health care information may cause significant harm to a 
 person's interests in privacy, health care, and reputation and 
 may unfairly affect the ability of a person to obtain 
 employment, education, insurance, and credit.
 (2) The movement of people and health care-related 
 information across State lines, availability of access to and 
 exchange of health care-related information from automated data 
 banks and networks, and emergence of multistate health care 
 providers and payors create a need for uniform Federal law 
 governing the disclosure of health care information.
 (b) Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to establish effective 
mechanisms to protect the privacy of persons with respect to personally 
identifiable health care information that is created or maintained as 
part of health treatment, enrollment, payment, testing, or research 
processes.

 Subpart B--Judicial Proceedings

SEC. 5162. PRIVACY OF PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE HEALTH CARE INFORMATION.

 (a) Offense.--Part I of title 18, United States Code, is amended by 
inserting after chapter 84, the following new chapter:

 ``CHAPTER 84A--PRIVACY OF PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE HEALTH CARE 
 INFORMATION

``Sec.
``1755. Wrongful disclosure of personally identifiable health care 
 information.
``1756. Misuse of health security card or unique identifier.
``Sec. 1755. Wrongful disclosure of protected health information
 ``(a) Definition.--The term `protected health information' shall 
have the meaning given such term under section 5163 of the Health 
Security Act.
 ``(b) Offense.--A person who knowingly--
 ``(1) obtains protected health information relating to an 
 individual in violation of subpart C of the Health Care Privacy 
 Protection Act; or
 ``(2) discloses protected health information to another 
 person in violation of subpart C of the Health Care Privacy 
 Protection Act,
shall be punished as provided in subsection (c).
 ``(c) Penalties.--A person who violates subsection (b) shall--
 ``(1) be fined not more than $50,000, imprisoned not more 
 than 1 year, or both;
 ``(2) if the offense is committed under false pretenses, be 
 fined not more than $100,000, imprisoned not more than 5 years, 
 or both; and
 ``(3) if the offense is committed with intent to sell, 
 transfer, or use protected health information for commercial 
 advantage, personal gain, or malicious harm, fined not more 
 than $250,000, imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both.
``Sec. 1756. Misuse of health security card or unique identifier
 ``A person who--
 ``(1) requires the display of, requires the use of, or uses 
 a health security card that is issued under the Health Security 
 Act for any purpose other than obtaining or paying for health 
 care; or
 ``(2) requires the disclosure of, requires the use of, or 
 uses a unique identifier number for any purpose that is not 
 authorized by the National Health Board,
shall be fined not more than $25,000, imprisoned not more than 2 years, 
or both.''.
 (b) Technical Amendment.--The part analysis for part I of title 18, 
United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item related to 
chapter 84, the following new item:

``84A. Privacy of personally identifiable health care 1755.''.
 information.

 Subpart C--Limitations on Disclosure of Protected Health Information

SEC. 5163. DEFINITIONS.

 In this subpart:
 (1) Enrollee.--The term ``enrollee'' means an individual 
 who is covered under a health plan. The term includes a 
 deceased individual who was covered under a health plan.
 (2) Enrollee representative.--The term ``enrollee 
 representative'' means any individual legally empowered to make 
 decisions concerning the provision of health care to an 
 enrollee (where the enrollee lacks the legal capacity under 
 State law to make such decisions) or the administrator or 
 executor of the estate of a deceased enrollee.
 (3) Health care.--The term ``health care''--
 (A) means--
 (i) a preventative, diagnostic, 
 therapeutic, rehabilitative, maintenance, or 
 palliative care, counseling, service, or 
 procedure--
 (I) with respect to the physical or 
 mental condition of an individual; or
 (II) affecting the structure or 
 function of the human body or any part 
 of the human body; or
 (ii) any sale or dispensing of a drug, 
 device, equipment, or other item to an 
 individual, or for the use of an individual, 
 pursuant to a prescription; but
 (B) does not include any item or service that is 
 not furnished for the purpose of examining, 
 maintaining, or improving the health of an individual.
 (4) Health care provider.--The term ``health care 
 provider'' means a person who is licensed, certified, 
 registered, or otherwise authorized by law to provide an item 
 or service that constitutes health care in the ordinary course 
 of business or practice of a profession.
 (5) Health information trustee.--The term ``health 
 information trustee'' means--
 (A) a health care provider, health plan, health 
 oversight agency, certified indexing system, certified 
 clearinghouse, certified health information protection 
 organization, or employer, insofar as it creates, 
 receives, maintains, uses, or transmits protected 
 health information; and
 (B) any person who obtains protected health 
 information under section 5169, 5170, 5171, 5172, 5173, 
 5174, or 5177.
 (6) Health oversight agency.--The term ``health oversight 
 agency'' means a person that--
 (A) performs or oversees the performance of an 
 assessment, evaluation, determination, or investigation 
 relating to the licensing, accreditation, or 
 certification of health care providers; or
 (B)(i) performs or oversees the performance of an 
 assessment, evaluation, determination, or investigation 
 relating to the effectiveness of, compliance with, or 
 applicability of legal, fiscal, medical, or scientific 
 standards or aspects of performance related to the 
 delivery of, or payment for, health care or relating to 
 health care fraud or fraudulent claims for payment 
 regarding health; and
 (ii) is a public agency, acting on behalf of a 
 public agency, acting pursuant to a requirement of a 
 public agency, or carrying out activities under a 
 Federal or State statute governing the assessment, 
 evaluation, determination, or investigation.
 (7) Health plan.--The term ``health plan'' shall have the 
 meaning given such term under section 5102(6).
 (8) Health researcher.--The term ``health researcher'' 
 means a person who conducts a biomedical, public health, health 
 services or health statistics research project or a research 
 project on social and behavioral factors relating to health, 
 that has been approved by--
 (A) an institutional review board for the 
 organization sponsoring the project;
 (B) an institutional review board for each health 
 information trustee that maintains protected health 
 information intended to be used in the project; or
 (C) an institutional review board established or 
 designated by the Board.
 (9) Institutional review board.--The term ``institutional 
 review board'' means--
 (A) a board established in accordance with 
 regulations of the Board under section 491(a) of the 
 Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 289);
 (B) a similar board established by the Board for 
 the protection of human subjects in research conducted 
 by the Board; or
 (C) a similar board established under regulations 
 of a Federal Government authority other than the Board.
 (10) Law enforcement inquiry.--The term ``law enforcement 
 inquiry'' means an investigation or official proceeding 
 inquiring into whether there is a violation of, or failure to 
 comply with, any criminal or civil statute or any regulation, 
 rule, or order issued pursuant to such a statute.
 (11) Person.--The term ``person'' includes an authority of 
 the United States, a State, or a political subdivision of a 
 State.
 (12) Protected health information.--The term ``protected 
 health information'' means any information, whether oral or 
 recorded in any form or medium, that--
 (A)(i) is created or received by a health care 
 provider, health plan, health oversight agency, public 
 health authority, certified indexing system, certified 
 clearinghouse, or certified health information 
 protection organization; or
 (ii) is created or received by an employer through 
 the process of testing, screening, or assisting 
 applicants or employees; and
 (B) relates to the past, present, or future 
 physical or mental health or condition of an enrollee, 
 the provision of health care to an enrollee, past, 
 present, or future payment for the provision of health 
 care to an enrollee, or demographic data collected from 
 the enrollee and--
 (i) identifies an individual; or
 (ii) with respect to which there is a 
 reasonable basis to believe that the 
 information can be used to identify an 
 individual.
 (12) Public health authority.--The term ``public health 
 authority'' means an authority or instrumentality of the United 
 States, a State, or a political subdivision of a State that is 
 (A) responsible for public health matters; and (B) engaged in 
 such activities as injury reporting, public health 
 surveillance, and public health investigation or intervention.
 (13) References to certain certified entities.--
 (A) Certified indexing system.--The term 
 ``certified indexing system'' shall have the meaning 
 given such term under section 5102.
 (B) Certified clearinghouse.--The term ``certified 
 clearinghouse'' shall have the meaning given such term 
 under section 5102.
 (C) Certified health information protection 
 organization.--The term ``certified health information 
 protection organization'' means a health information 
 protection organization (as defined in section 5102(5)) 
 that is certified under section 5119.

SEC. 5164. GENERAL LIMITATIONS ON DISCLOSURE.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Disclosure within a trustee.--A health information 
 trustee may disclose protected health information to an 
 officer, employee, or agent of the trustee only for a purpose 
 that is compatible with and related to the purpose for which 
 the information--
 (A) was collected; or
 (B) was received by that trustee.
 (2) Disclosure outside a trustee.--A health information 
 trustee may disclose protected health information to a person 
 other than an officer, employee, or agent of the trustee only 
 for a purpose that is authorized under this Act.
 (3) Scope of disclosure.--
 (A) In general.--Every disclosure of protected 
 health information by a health information trustee 
 shall be limited to the minimum amount of information 
 necessary to accomplish the purpose for which the 
 information is disclosed.
 (B) Guidelines.--Not later than July 1, 1996, the 
 Board, after notice and opportunity for public comment, 
 shall issue guidelines to implement subparagraph (A), 
 which shall take into account the technical 
 capabilities of the record systems used to maintain 
 protected health information and the costs of limiting 
 disclosure.
 (4) Identification of disclosed information as protected 
 information.--Except with respect to protected health 
 information that is disclosed under section 5179, and except as 
 provided in paragraph (5), a health information trustee may not 
 disclose protected health information unless such information 
 is clearly identified as protected health information that is 
 subject to this section.
 (5) Routine disclosures subject to written agreement.--A 
 health information trustee who routinely discloses protected 
 health information to a person may satisfy the identification 
 requirement in paragraph (4) through a written agreement 
 between the trustee and the person with respect to the 
 protected health information.
 (6) Agreement to limit disclosure.--A health information 
 trustee who receives protected health information from any 
 person pursuant to a written agreement to restrict disclosure 
 of the information to a greater extent than would otherwise be 
 required under this section shall comply with the terms of the 
 agreement, except in circumstances in which disclosure of the 
 information is required by law notwithstanding the agreement.
 (7) No general requirement to disclose.--Except as provided 
 in the section 5179 relating to inspection, nothing in this 
 section shall be construed to require a health information 
 trustee to disclose protected health information not otherwise 
 required to be disclosed by law.
 (b) Disclosure by Officer, Employee, or Agent.--No officer, 
employee, or agent of a health information trustee may disclose 
protected health information, except insofar as the health information 
trustee is permitted to disclose such information for a purpose that is 
authorized under this Act.

SEC. 5165. AUTHORIZATIONS FOR DISCLOSURE OF PROTECTED HEALTH 
 INFORMATION.

 (a) Written Authorizations.--A health care provider and health plan 
may disclose protected health information pursuant to an authorization 
executed by the enrollee who is the subject of the information, if each 
of the following requirements is met:
 (1) Writing.--The authorization is in writing, signed by 
 the enrollee who is the subject of the information, and dated 
 on the date of such signature.
 (2) Separate form.--The authorization is not on a form used 
 to authorize or facilitate the provision of, or payment for, 
 health care.
 (3) Trustee described.--The trustee is specifically named 
 or generically described in the authorization as authorized to 
 disclose such information.
 (4) Recipient described.--The person to whom the 
 information is to be disclosed is specifically named or 
 generically described in the authorization as a person to whom 
 such information may be disclosed.
 (5) Statement of intended disclosures.--The authorization 
 contains an acknowledgment that the enrollee who is the subject 
 of the information has received a statement of the disclosures 
 that the person to receive the protected health information 
 intends to make, which statement shall be in writing, on a form 
 that is distinct from the authorization for disclosure, and 
 which statement must be received by the enrollee authorizing 
 the disclosure on or before such authorization is executed.
 (6) Information described.--The information to be disclosed 
 is described in the authorization.
 (7) Authorization timely received.--The authorization is 
 received by the trustee during a period described in subsection 
 (c)(1).
 (8) Disclosure timely made.--The disclosure occurs during a 
 period described in subsection (c)(2).
 (b) Authorizations Requested in Connection With Provision of Health 
Care.--
 (1) In general.--A health information trustee may not 
 request that an individual person provide to any other person 
 an authorization described in subsection (a) on a day on 
 which--
 (A) the trustee provides health care to the 
 individual requested to provide the authorization; or
 (B) in the case of a trustee that is a health 
 facility, the individual is admitted into the facility 
 as a resident or inpatient in order to receive health 
 care.
 (2) Exception.--Paragraph (1) does not apply if a health 
 information trustee requests that an individual provide an 
 authorization described in subsection (a) for the purpose of 
 assisting the individual in obtaining counseling or social 
 services from a person other than the trustee.
 (c) Time Limitations on Authorizations.--
 (1) Receipt by trustee.--For purposes of subsection (a)(7), 
 an authorization is timely received if it is received by the 
 trustee during--
 (A) the 1-year period beginning on the date on 
 which the authorization is signed under subsection 
 (a)(1), if the authorization permits the disclosure of 
 protected health information to a person who provides 
 health counseling or social services to individuals; or
 (B) the 30-day period beginning on the date on 
 which the authorization is signed under subsection 
 (a)(1), if the authorization permits the disclosure of 
 protected health information to a person other than a 
 person described in subparagraph (A).
 (2) Disclosure by trustee.--For purposes of subsection 
 (a)(8), a disclosure is timely made if it occurs before--
 (A) the date or event (if any) specified in the 
 authorization upon which the authorization expires; and
 (B) the expiration of the 6-month period beginning 
 on the date on which the trustee receives the 
 authorization.
 (d) Revocation or Amendment of Authorization.--
 (1) In general.--An individual may in writing revoke or 
 amend an authorization described in subsection (a), in whole or 
 in part, at any time, except when--
 (A) disclosure of protected health information has 
 been authorized to permit validation of expenditures 
 for health care; or
 (B) action has been taken in reliance on the 
 authorization.
 (2) Notice of revocation.--A health information trustee who 
 discloses protected health information pursuant to an 
 authorization that has been revoked shall not be subject to any 
 liability or penalty under this subpart if--
 (A) the reliance was in good faith;
 (B) the trustee had no notice of the revocation; 
 and
 (C) the disclosure was otherwise in accordance with 
 the requirements of this subpart.
 (e) Deceased Individual.--The Board shall develop and establish 
through regulation a procedure for obtaining protected health 
information relating to a deceased individual when there is no 
administrator or executor of such individual's estate.
 (f) Model Authorizations.--The Board, after notice and opportunity 
for public comment, shall develop and disseminate model written 
authorizations of the type described in subsection (a) and model 
statements of intended disclosures of the type described in paragraph 
(a)(5).
 (g) Effect of Authorization on Privileges.--The execution by an 
individual of an authorization that meets the requirements of this 
section for the purpose of receiving health care or providing for the 
payment for health care shall not be construed to affect any privilege 
that the individual may have under common or statutory law in a court 
of a State or the United States.
 (h) Additional Requirements of Trustee.--A health information 
trustee may impose requirements for an authorization that are in 
addition to the requirements in this subsection.
 (i) Copy.--A health information trustee who discloses protected 
health information pursuant to an authorization under this section 
shall maintain a copy of the authorization as part of the information.
 (j) Rule of Construction.--This section shall not be construed--
 (1) to require a health information trustee to disclose 
 protected health information; or
 (2) to limit the right of a health information trustee to 
 charge a fee for the disclosure or reproduction of protected 
 health information.
 (k) Subpoenas.--If a health information trustee discloses protected 
health information pursuant to an authorization in order to comply with 
a subpoena, the authorization--
 (1) shall specifically authorize the disclosure for the 
 purpose of permitting the trustee to comply with the subpoena; 
 and
 (2) shall otherwise meet the requirements in this 
 subsection.

SEC. 5166. TREATMENT; FINANCIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE TRANSACTIONS.

 (a) Disclosure of Information.--
 (1) In general.--A health care provider, health plan, or 
 employer may disclose protected health information to a health 
 care provider for the purpose of providing health care to an 
 enrollee if the enrollee who is the subject of the information 
 has not previously objected to the disclosure in writing.
 (2) Providing for payment.--A health care provider, health 
 plan, employer, or certified indexing system may disclose 
 protected health information to a health plan for the purpose 
 of providing for the payment for health care furnished to an 
 enrollee.
 (3) Cooperative.--A health care provider or health plan may 
 disclose protected health information to a consumer purchasing 
 cooperative established under subtitle D of title I in 
 connection with a financial and administrative transaction 
 described in section 5113.
 (4) Indexing systems.--A health care provider or health 
 plan may disclose protected health information to a certified 
 indexing system or certified clearinghouse for the purpose of 
 carrying out the functions of such system or clearinghouse 
 under part 1.
 (b) Scope of Disclosure.--The disclosure of protected health 
information under this section shall be limited to the minimum amount 
necessary to accomplish the purpose for which the disclosure is 
authorized.

SEC. 5167. OVERSIGHT.

 (a) In General.--A health information trustee may disclose 
protected health information to a health oversight agency for a purpose 
authorized by law.
 (b) Scope of Disclosure.--The disclosure of protected health 
information under this section shall be limited to the minimum amount 
necessary to accomplish the purpose for which the disclosure is 
authorized.
 (c) Use in Action Against Enrollees.--Protected health information 
about an enrollee that is disclosed under this section may not be used 
in, or disclosed to any person for use in, any administrative, civil, 
or criminal action or investigation directed against the enrollee who 
is the subject of the information, except in an action or investigation 
arising out of and directly related to receipt of health care or 
payment for health care or an action involving a fraudulent claim 
related to health.

SEC. 5168. NEXT OF KIN AND DIRECTORY INFORMATION.

 (a) Next of Kin.--A health care provider or person that receives 
protected health information under section 5170 may disclose protected 
health information to the next of kin or enrollee representative of the 
enrollee who is the subject of the information or to an individual with 
whom that enrollee has a personal relationship if--
 (1) the enrollee who is the subject of the information has 
 not previously objected to the disclosure after being notified 
 of the right to object; and
 (2) the information disclosed relates to health care 
 currently being provided to that enrollee.
 (b) Directory Information.--A health care provider and a person 
receiving protected health information under section 5170 may disclose 
information to any person if--
 (1) the information does not reveal specific information 
 about the physical or mental condition of the enrollee who is 
 the subject of the information or health care provided to that 
 person;
 (2) the enrollee who is the subject of the information has 
 not objected in writing to the disclosure after being notified 
 of the right to object; and
 (3) the information consists only of 1 or more of the 
 following items:
 (A) The name of the enrollee who is the subject of 
 the information.
 (B) If the enrollee who is the subject of the 
 information is receiving health care from a health care 
 provider on a premises controlled by the provider--
 (i) the location of the enrollee on the 
 premises; and
 (ii) the general health status of the 
 enrollee, described as critical, poor, fair, 
 stable, or satisfactory or in terms denoting 
 similar conditions.
 (c) Identification of Dead Person.--A health care provider, health 
plan, employer, certified indexing system, or certified clearinghouse 
may disclose protected health information if necessary to assist in the 
identification of a dead person.
 (d) Minimum Disclosure.--The disclosure of protected health 
information under this section shall be limited to the minimum amount 
necessary to accomplish the purpose for which the disclosure is 
authorized.

SEC. 5169. PUBLIC HEALTH.

 (a) In General.--A health care provider, health plan, public health 
authority, employer, or person that receives protected health 
information under section 5170 may disclose protected health 
information to a public health authority or other person authorized by 
law for use in legally authorized--
 (1) disease or injury reporting;
 (2) public health surveillance; or
 (3) public health investigation or intervention.
 (b) Scope of Disclosure.--The disclosure of protected health 
information under this section shall be limited to the minimum amount 
necessary to accomplish the purpose for which the disclosure is 
authorized.

SEC. 5170. EMERGENCY CIRCUMSTANCES.

 (a) In General.--A health care provider, health plan, employer, 
certified indexing system, certified clearinghouse, or person that 
receives protected health information under this section may disclose 
protected health information in emergency circumstances when necessary 
to protect the health or safety of an individual from imminent harm.
 (b) Scope of Disclosure.--The disclosure of protected health 
information under this section shall be limited to the minimum amount 
necessary to accomplish the purpose for which the disclosure is 
permitted and shall be limited to persons who need the information to 
take action to protect the health or safety of the enrollee.
 (c) Use in Action Against Enrollee.--Protected health information 
about an enrollee that is disclosed under this section may not be used 
in, or disclosed to any person for use in, any administrative, civil, 
or criminal action or investigation directed against the enrollee.

SEC. 5171. JUDICIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PURPOSES.

 (a) In General.--A health care provider, health plan, health 
oversight agency, or employer may disclose protected health 
information--
 (1) pursuant to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, the 
 Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, or comparable rules of 
 other courts or administrative agencies in connection with 
 litigation or proceedings to which the enrollee who is the 
 subject of the information is a party and in which the enrollee 
 has placed the enrollee's physical or mental condition in 
 issue;
 (2) if ordered by a court in connection with an examination 
 of an enrollee; or
 (3) pursuant to a law requiring the reporting of specific 
 medical information to law enforcement authorities.
 (b) Scope of Disclosure.--The disclosure of protected health 
information under this section shall be limited to the minimum amount 
necessary to accomplish the purpose for which the disclosure is 
permitted.
 (c) Limit on Additional Disclosure.--A person that receives 
protected health information under this section may use the information 
and disclose such information only for the purpose for which it was 
received.

SEC. 5172. HEALTH RESEARCH.

 (a) In General.--Subject to subsection (d), a health information 
trustee may disclose protected health information to a health 
researcher if an institutional review board has determined that the 
research project engaged in by the health researcher--
 (1) requires use of the protected health information for 
 the effectiveness of the project; and
 (2) is of sufficient importance to outweigh the intrusion 
 into the privacy of the enrollee who is the subject of the 
 information that would result from the disclosure.
 (b) Obligations of Recipient.--A person who receives protected 
health information pursuant to subsection (a)--
 (1) shall remove or destroy, at the earliest opportunity 
 consistent with the purposes of the project, information that 
 would enable an enrollee to be identified, unless--
 (A) an institutional review board has determined 
 that there is a health or research justification for 
 retention of such identifiers; and
 (B) there is an adequate plan to protect the 
 identifiers from disclosure that is inconsistent with 
 this section; and
 (2) shall use protected health information solely for 
 purposes of the health research project for which disclosure 
 was authorized under this section.
 (c) Scope of Disclosure.--The disclosure of protected health 
information under this section shall be limited to the minimum amount 
necessary to accomplish the research purpose for which the disclosure 
is authorized.
 (d) Research Requiring Direct Contact.--Protected information may 
not be disclosed to a health researcher for a research project that 
includes direct contact with an enrollee who is the subject of 
protected health information unless the enrollee has been given notice 
by the health information trustee that such contact is possible, has 
been given the opportunity to object to the disclosure, and has not 
objected.

SEC. 5173. LAW ENFORCEMENT.

 (a) In General.--A health care provider, health plan, health 
oversight agency, employer, or other person that receives protected 
health information under section 5170 may disclose protected health 
information to a law enforcement agency (other than a health oversight 
agency governed by section 5167) if the information is requested for 
use--
 (1) in an investigation or prosecution of a health 
 information trustee;
 (2) in the identification of a victim or witness in a law 
 enforcement inquiry; or
 (3) in connection with the investigation of criminal 
 activity committed against the trustee or on premises 
 controlled by the trustee.
 (b) Certification.--When a law enforcement agency (other than a 
health oversight agency) requests that a health information trustee 
disclose protected health information under this subsection, the law 
enforcement agency shall provide the trustee with a written 
certification that--
 (1) specifies the information requested;
 (2) states that the information is needed for a lawful 
 purpose under this section; and
 (3) is signed by a supervisory official of a rank 
 designated by the head of the agency.
 (c) Scope of Disclosure.--The disclosure of protected health 
information under this section shall be limited to the minimum amount 
necessary to accomplish the purposes for which the disclosure is 
permitted.
 (d) Restrictions on Additional Disclosure.--Protected health 
information about an enrollee that is disclosed to a law enforcement 
agency under this section--
 (1) may not be disclosed for, or used in, any 
 administrative, civil, or criminal action or investigation 
 against the enrollee, except in an action or investigation 
 arising out of and directly related to the action or 
 investigation for which the information was obtained; and
 (2) may not be otherwise used or disclosed by the law 
 enforcement agency, unless the use or disclosure is necessary 
 to fulfill the purpose for which the information was obtained 
 and is not otherwise prohibited by law.

SEC. 5174. SUBPOENAS AND WARRANTS.

 (a) In General.--A health care provider, health plan, health 
oversight agency, employer, or person that receives protected health 
information under section 5170 may disclose protected health 
information under this section if the disclosure is pursuant to--
 (1) a subpoena issued under the authority of a grand jury, 
 and the trustee is provided a written certification by the 
 grand jury seeking the information that the grand jury has 
 complied with the applicable access provisions of section 5175;
 (2) an administrative subpoena or a judicial subpoena or 
 warrant, and the trustee is provided a written certification by 
 the person seeking the information that the person has complied 
 with the applicable access provisions of section 5175 or 5176; 
 or
 (3) an administrative subpoena or a judicial subpoena or 
 warrant, and the disclosure otherwise meets the conditions of 
 section 5167, 5169, 5170, 5171, or 5173.
 (b) Restrictions on Additional Disclosure.--Protected health 
information about an enrollee that is received under--
 (1) subsection (a) may not be disclosed for, or used in, 
 any administrative, civil, or criminal action or investigation 
 against the enrollee, except in an action or investigation 
 arising out of and directly related to the inquiry for which 
 the information was obtained;
 (2) subsection (a)(2) may not be otherwise disclosed by the 
 recipient unless the disclosure is necessary to fulfill the 
 purpose for which the information was obtained; and
 (3) subsection (a)(3) may not be disclosed by the recipient 
 unless the recipient complies with the conditions and 
 restrictions on disclosure with which the recipient would have 
 been required to comply if the disclosure had been made under 
 section 5168, 5169, 5170, 5171, or 5173.

SEC. 5175. ACCESS PROCEDURES FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT SUBPOENAS AND 
 WARRANTS.

 (a) Probable Cause Requirement.--A government authority may not 
obtain protected health information about an enrollee under section 
5174(a) (1) or (2) for use in a law enforcement inquiry unless there is 
probable cause to believe that the information is relevant to a 
legitimate law enforcement inquiry being conducted by the government 
authority.
 (b) Warrants.--A government authority that obtains protected health 
information about an enrollee under circumstances described in 
subsection (a) and pursuant to a warrant shall, not later than 30 days 
after the date the warrant was executed, serve the enrollee with, or 
mail to the last known address of the enrollee, a notice that protected 
health information about the enrollee was so obtained.
 (c) Subpoenas.--Except as provided in subsection (d), a government 
authority may not obtain protected health information about an enrollee 
under circumstances described in subsection (a) and pursuant to a 
subpoena unless a copy of the subpoena has been served on the enrollee 
on or before the date of return of the subpoena, together with a notice 
of the enrollee's right to challenge the subpoena in accordance with 
section 5176, and--
 (1) 30 days have passed from the date of service on the 
 enrollee and within that time period the enrollee has not 
 initiated a challenge in accordance with section 5176; or
 (2) disclosure is ordered by a court after challenge under 
 section 5176.
 (d) Application for Delay.--
 (1) In general.--A government authority may apply ex parte 
 and under seal to an appropriate court to delay (for an initial 
 period of not longer than 90 days) serving a copy of a subpoena 
 or notice required under subsection (b) or (c) with respect to 
 a law enforcement inquiry. The government authority may apply 
 to the court for extensions of the delay.
 (2) Reasons for delay.--An application for a delay, or 
 extension of a delay, under this subsection shall state, with 
 reasonable specificity, the reasons why the delay or extension 
 is being sought.
 (3) Ex parte order.--The court shall enter an ex parte 
 order delaying, or extending the delay of, notice and an order 
 prohibiting the disclosure of the request for or disclosure of 
 the protected health information and an order requiring the 
 disclosure of the protected health information if the court 
 finds that--
 (A) the inquiry being conducted is within the 
 lawful jurisdiction of the government authority seeking 
 the protected health information;
 (B) there is probable cause to believe that the 
 protected health information being sought is relevant 
 to a legitimate law enforcement inquiry;
 (C) the government authority's need for the 
 information outweighs the privacy interest of the 
 enrollee who is the subject of the information; and
 (D) there is reasonable ground to believe that 
 receipt of notice by the enrollee will result in--
 (i) endangering the life or physical safety 
 of any individual;
 (ii) flight from prosecution;
 (iii) destruction of or tampering with 
 evidence or the information being sought; or
 (iv) intimidation of potential witnesses.

SEC. 5176. CHALLENGE PROCEDURES FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT SUBPOENAS.

 (a) Motion To Quash Subpoena.--Within 30 days after the date of 
service of a subpoena of a government authority seeking protected 
health information about an enrollee under section 5174 (a) (1) or (2), 
or notice that protected health information has been obtained by a 
government authority, the enrollee may file a motion to quash the 
subpoena--
 (1) in the case of a State judicial subpoena, in the court 
 which issued the subpoena;
 (2) in the case of a subpoena issued under the authority of 
 a State that is not a State judicial subpoena, in a court of 
 competent jurisdiction;
 (3) in the case of a subpoena issued under the authority of 
 a Federal court, in the United States district court for the 
 district in which the enrollee resides or in which the subpoena 
 was issued; or
 (4) in the case of any other subpoena issued under the 
 authority of the United States, in the United States district 
 court for the district in which the enrollee resides or in 
 which the subpoena was issued.
 (b) Copy.--A copy of the motion shall be served by the enrollee 
upon the government authority by registered or certified mail.
 (c) Proceedings.--The government authority may file with the court 
such papers, including affidavits and other sworn documents, as sustain 
the validity of the subpoena. The enrollee may file with the court 
reply papers in response to the government authority's filing. The 
court, upon the request of the enrollee or the government authority or 
both, may proceed in camera. The court may conduct such proceedings as 
it deems appropriate to rule on the motion, but shall endeavor to 
expedite its determination.
 (d) Standard for Decision.--A court may deny a motion under 
subsection (a) if it finds there is probable cause to believe the 
protected health information being sought is relevant to a legitimate 
law enforcement inquiry being conducted by the government authority, 
unless the court finds the enrollee's privacy interest outweighs the 
government authority's need for the information. The enrollee shall 
have the burden of demonstrating that the enrollee's privacy interest 
outweighs the need established by the government authority for the 
information.
 (e) Specific Considerations With Respect to Privacy Interest.--In 
reaching its determination, the court shall consider--
 (1) the particular purpose for which the information was 
 collected;
 (2) the degree to which disclosure of the information will 
 embarrass, injure, or invade the privacy of the enrollee;
 (3) the effect of the disclosure on the enrollee's future 
 health care;
 (4) the importance of the inquiry being conducted by the 
 government authority, and the importance of the information to 
 that inquiry; and
 (5) any other factor deemed relevant by the court.
 (f) Attorney's Fees.--In the case of a motion brought under 
subsection (a) in which the enrollee has substantially prevailed, the 
court may assess against the government authority a reasonable 
attorney's fee and other litigation costs (including expert's fees) 
reasonably incurred.
 (g) No Interlocutory Appeal.--A ruling denying a motion to quash 
under this section shall not be deemed to be a final order, and no 
interlocutory appeal may be taken therefrom by the enrollee. An appeal 
of such a ruling may be taken by the enrollee within such period of 
time as is provided by law as part of any appeal from a final order in 
any legal proceeding initiated against the enrollee arising out of or 
based upon the protected health information disclosed.

SEC. 5177. ACCESS AND CHALLENGE PROCEDURES FOR SUBPOENAS OTHER THAN LAW 
 ENFORCEMENT SUBPOENAS.

 (a) In General.--A private party may not obtain protected health 
information from a health care provider, health plan, employer, or 
person that receives protected health information under section 5170 
pursuant to a subpoena unless--
 (1) a copy of the subpoena together with a notice of the 
 enrollee's right to challenge the subpoena by filing a motion 
 to quash under subsection (b), has been served upon the 
 enrollee who is the subject of the protected health information 
 on or before the date on which the subpoena was served; and
 (2)(A) 30 days have passed since the date of service, and 
 within that time period the enrollee has not filed a motion 
 under subsection (b); or
 (B) disclosure is ordered by a court under that subsection.
 (b) Motion To Quash.--Within 30 days after service of a subpoena 
seeking protected health information under subsection (a), the enrollee 
who is the subject of the protected health information may file in any 
court of competent jurisdiction a motion to quash the subpoena, with a 
copy served on the person seeking the information. The enrollee may 
oppose or seek to limit the subpoena on any ground that would be 
available if the enrollee were in sole possession of the information, 
including privacy and relevance.
 (c) Standard for Decision.--The court shall grant a motion under 
subsection (b) unless the respondent demonstrates that--
 (1) there is reasonable ground to believe the information 
 is relevant to a lawsuit or other judicial or administrative 
 proceeding; and
 (2) the need of the respondent for the information 
 outweighs the privacy interest of the enrollee.
 (d) Specific Considerations With Respect to Privacy Interest.--In 
determining under subsection (c) whether the need of the respondent for 
the information outweighs the privacy interest of the enrollee, the 
court shall consider--
 (1) the particular purpose for which the information was 
 collected;
 (2) the degree to which disclosure of the information would 
 embarrass, injure, or invade the privacy of the enrollee;
 (3) the effect of the disclosure on the enrollee's future 
 health care;
 (4) the importance of the information to the lawsuit or 
 proceeding; and
 (5) any other relevant factor.
 (e) Attorney's Fees.--In the case of a motion brought under 
subsection (b) in which the enrollee has substantially prevailed, the 
court may assess against the respondent a reasonable attorney's fee and 
other litigation costs and expenses (including expert's fees) 
reasonably incurred.

SEC. 5178. SECURITY.

 (a) In General.--A health information trustee shall establish and 
maintain appropriate administrative, technical, and physical 
safeguards--
 (1) to ensure the integrity and confidentiality of 
 protected health information created or received by the 
 trustee; and
 (2) to protect against any anticipated threats or hazards 
 to the security or integrity of such information.
 (b) Specific Security Measures.--The security measures adopted by a 
health information trustee shall include the following:
 (1) officers, employees, and agents of the trustee who have 
 access to protected health information created or received by 
 the trustee shall be regularly trained in the requirements 
 governing such information;
 (2) complete, accurate, and readily available documentation 
 of security features shall be maintained, if the maintenance of 
 such documentation is practicable, taking into account the 
 technical capabilities of the system used to maintain protected 
 health information and the costs of such maintenance; and
 (3) appropriate signs and warnings shall be posted to 
 advise of the need to secure protected health information.
 (c) Regulations.--The Board shall promulgate regulations regarding 
security measures for protected health information.

SEC. 5179. INSPECTION OF PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION.

 (a) Inspection of Protected Health Information.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (3), a 
 health care provider or health plan--
 (A) shall permit an enrollee who is the subject of 
 protected health information to inspect any such 
 information that the provider or plan maintains;
 (B) shall permit the enrollee to have a copy of the 
 information;
 (C) shall permit a person who has been designated 
 in writing by the enrollee who is the subject of the 
 information to inspect, or to have a copy of, the 
 information on behalf of the enrollee or to accompany 
 the enrollee during the inspection; and
 (D) may offer to explain or interpret information 
 that is inspected or copied under this subsection.
 (2) Use of indexing systems.--Except as provided in 
 paragraph (3), a health plan or health care provider shall, 
 upon written request of an enrollee--
 (A) determine the identity of previous providers to 
 the enrollee; and
 (B) obtain protected health information regarding 
 the enrollee.
 The plan or provider may obtain such information through use of 
 a certified indexing system.
 (3) Exceptions.--A health care provider or health plan is 
 not required by this section to permit inspection or copying of 
 protected health information if any of the following conditions 
 apply:
 (A) Mental health treatment notes.--The information 
 consists of psychiatric, psychological, or mental 
 health treatment notes, and the provider or plan 
 determines, based on reasonable medical judgment, that 
 inspection or copying of the notes would cause 
 sufficient harm to the enrollee who is the subject of 
 the notes so as to outweigh the desirability of 
 permitting access, and the provider or plan has not 
 disclosed the notes to any person not directly engaged 
 in treating the enrollee, except with the authorization 
 of the enrollee or under compulsion of law.
 (B) Information about others.--The information 
 relates to an individual other than the enrollee 
 seeking to inspect or have a copy of the information 
 and the provider or plan determines, based on 
 reasonable medical judgment, that inspection or copying 
 of the information would cause sufficient harm to 1 or 
 both of the individuals so as to outweigh the 
 desirability of permitting access.
 (C) Endangerment to life or safety.--The provider 
 or plan determines that disclosure of the information 
 could reasonably be expected to endanger the life or 
 physical safety of any individual.
 (D) Confidential source.--The information 
 identifies or could reasonably lead to the 
 identification of a person (other than a health care 
 provider) who provided information under a promise of 
 confidentiality to a health care provider concerning 
 the enrollee who is the subject of the information.
 (E) Administrative purposes.--The information--
 (i) is used by the provider or plan solely 
 for administrative purposes and not in the 
 provision of health care to the enrollee who is 
 the subject of the information; and
 (ii) has not been disclosed by the provider 
 or plan to any other person.
 (3) Inspection and copying of segregable portion.--A health 
 care provider or health plan shall permit inspection and 
 copying under paragraph (1) of any reasonably segregable 
 portion of a record after deletion of any portion that is 
 exempt under paragraph (2).
 (4) Conditions.--A health care provider or health plan 
 may--
 (A) require a written request for the inspection 
 and copying of protected health information under this 
 subsection; and
 (B) charge a reasonable fee (not greater than the 
 actual cost) for--
 (i) permitting inspection of information 
 under this subsection; and
 (ii) providing a copy of protected health 
 information under this subsection.
 (5) Statement of reasons for denial.--If a health care 
 provider or health plan denies a request for inspection or 
 copying under this subsection, the provider or plan shall 
 provide the enrollee who made the request (or the enrollee's 
 designated representative) with a written statement of the 
 reasons for the denial.
 (6) Deadline.--A health care provider or health plan shall 
 comply with or deny a request for inspection or copying of 
 protected health information under this subsection within the 
 30-day period beginning on the date on which the provider or 
 plan receives the request.

SEC. 5180. AMENDMENT OF PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION.

 (a) In General.--A health care provider or health plan that is 
required to comply with section 5179 shall, within the 45-day period 
beginning on the date on which the provider or plan receives from an 
enrollee a written request that the provider or plan correct or amend 
the information--
 (1) make the correction or amendment requested;
 (2) inform the enrollee of the correction or amendment that 
 has been made;
 (3) inform any certified indexing system or certified 
 clearinghouse to which the uncorrected or unamended portion of 
 the information was previously disclosed, of the correction or 
 amendment; and
 (4) inform any person who is identified by the enrollee, 
 who is not an officer, employee or agent of the provider or 
 plan, and to whom the uncorrected or unamended portion of the 
 information was previously disclosed, of the correction or 
 amendment that has been made.
 (b) Refusal to Correct.--If the provider or plan refuses to make 
the corrections, the provider or plan shall inform the enrollee of--
 (1) the reasons for the refusal of the provider or plan to 
 make the correction or amendment;
 (2) any procedures for further review of the refusal; and
 (3) the enrollee's right to file with the provider or plan 
 a concise statement setting forth the requested correction or 
 amendment and the enrollee's reasons for disagreeing with the 
 refusal of the provider or plan.
 (c) Bases For Request To Correct or Amend.--An enrollee may request 
correction or amendment of protected health information about the 
enrollee under paragraph (a) if the information is not timely, 
accurate, relevant to the system of records, or complete.
 (d) Statement of Disagreement.--After an enrollee has filed a 
statement of disagreement under paragraph (b)(3), the provider or plan, 
in any subsequent disclosure of the disputed portion of the 
information--
 (1) shall include a copy of the enrollee's statement; and
 (2) may include a concise statement of the reasons of the 
 provider or plan for not making the requested correction or 
 amendment.
 (e) Rule of Construction.--This section shall not be construed to 
require a health care provider or health plan to conduct a formal, 
informal, or other hearing or proceeding concerning a request for a 
correction or amendment to protected health information the provider or 
plan maintains.
 (f) Correction.--For purposes of paragraph (a), a correction is 
deemed to have been made to protected health information when 
information that is not timely, accurate, relevant to the system of 
records, or complete is clearly marked as incorrect or when 
supplementary correct information is made part of the information.
 (g) Notice of Information Practices.--
 (1) Preparation of written notice.--A health care provider 
 or health plan shall prepare a written notice of information 
 practices describing the following:
 (A) Personal rights of an enrollee.--The rights 
 under this section of an enrollee who is the subject of 
 protected health information, including the right to 
 inspect and copy such information and the right to seek 
 amendments to such information, and the procedures for 
 authorizing disclosures of protected health information 
 and for revoking such authorizations.
 (B) Procedures of provider or plan.--The procedures 
 established by the provider or plan for the exercise of 
 the rights of enrollees about whom protected health 
 information is maintained.
 (C) Authorized disclosures.--The disclosures of 
 protected health information that are authorized.
 (2) Dissemination of notice.--A health care provider or 
 health plan--
 (A) shall, upon request, provide any enrollee with 
 a copy of the notice of information practices described 
 in paragraph (1); and
 (B) shall make reasonable efforts to inform 
 enrollees in a clear and conspicuous manner of the 
 existence and availability of the notice.
 (3) Model notice.--The Board, after notice and opportunity 
 for public comment, shall develop and disseminate a model 
 notice of information practices for use by health care 
 providers and health plans under this section.

SEC. 5181. ACCOUNTING FOR DISCLOSURES.

 (a) In General.--A health care provider or health plan that is 
required to comply with sections 5179 and 5180 shall create and 
maintain, with respect to any protected health information disclosed, a 
record of--
 (1) the date and purpose of the disclosure;
 (2) the name of the person to whom or to which the 
 disclosure was made;
 (3) the address of the person to whom or to which the 
 disclosure was made or the location to which the disclosure was 
 made; and
 (4) the information disclosed, if the recording of the 
 information disclosed is practicable, taking into account the 
 technical capabilities of the system used to maintain the 
 record and the costs of such maintenance.
 (b) Disclosure Record Part of Information.--A record created and 
maintained under paragraph (a) shall be maintained as part of the 
protected health information to which the record pertains, except for 
requests from and disclosures to health oversight agencies.
 (c) Certified Indexing Systems and Certified Clearinghouses.--
 (1) In general.--Certified indexing systems and certified 
 clearinghouses shall account for disclosures of protected 
 health information in the manner prescribed under subsection 
 (a).
 (2) Special rule.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to 
 disclosures made in connection with financial and 
 administrative transactions and to health information 
 protection organizations (as such terms are defined under part 
 1) for the creation of health information that is non-
 identifiable health information.

SEC. 5182. STANDARDS FOR ELECTRONIC DOCUMENTS AND COMMUNICATIONS.

 The Board, after notice and opportunity for public comment, shall 
promulgate standards with respect to the creation, transmission, 
receipt, and maintenance, in electronic form, of each written document 
required or authorized under this subpart. When a signature is required 
with respect to a written document under any other provision of this 
subpart, such standards shall provide for an electronic substitute that 
serves the functional equivalent of a signature.

SEC. 5183. RIGHTS OF INCOMPETENTS.

 (a) Effect of Declaration of Incompetence.--Except as provided in 
section 5184, if an enrollee has been declared to be incompetent by a 
court of competent jurisdiction, the rights of the enrollee under this 
subpart shall be exercised and discharged in the best interests of the 
enrollee through the enrollee's representative.
 (b) No Court Declaration.--Except as provided in section 5184, if a 
health care provider determines that an enrollee, who has not been 
declared to be incompetent by a court of competent jurisdiction, 
suffers from a medical condition that prevents the enrollee from acting 
knowingly or effectively on the enrollee's own behalf, the right of the 
enrollee to authorize disclosure may be exercised and discharged in the 
best interest of the enrollee by the enrollee's next of kin.

SEC. 5184. RIGHTS OF MINORS.

 (a) Individuals Who Are 18 or Legally Capable.--In the case of an 
enrollee--
 (1) who is 18 years of age or older, all rights of the 
 enrollee shall be exercised by the enrollee; or
 (2) who, acting alone, has the legal right, as determined 
 by State law, to apply for and obtain a type of medical 
 examination, care, or treatment and who has sought such 
 examination, care, or treatment, the enrollee shall exercise 
 all rights of an enrollee under this subpart with respect to 
 protected health information relating to such examination, 
 care, or treatment.
 (b) Individuals Under 18.--Except as provided in subsection (a)(2), 
in the case of an enrollee who is--
 (1) under 14 years of age, all the enrollee's rights under 
 this subpart shall be exercised through the parent or legal 
 guardian of the enrollee; or
 (2) 14, 15, 16, or 17 years of age, the rights of 
 inspection and amendment, and the right to authorize disclosure 
 of protected health information of the enrollee may be 
 exercised either by the enrollee or by the parent or legal 
 guardian of the enrollee.

SEC. 5185. NO LIABILITY FOR PERMISSIBLE DISCLOSURES.

 A health information trustee who makes a disclosure of protected 
health information about an enrollee that is permitted by this subpart 
shall not be liable to the enrollee for the disclosure under common 
law.

SEC. 5186. NO LIABILITY FOR INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD DETERMINATIONS.

 If the members of an institutional review board make a 
determination in good faith that--
 (1) a health research project is of sufficient importance 
 to outweigh the intrusion into the privacy of an enrollee; and
 (2) the effectiveness of the project requires use of 
 protected health information,
the members, the board, and the parent institution of the board shall 
not be liable to the enrollee as a result of the determination.

SEC. 5187. GOOD FAITH RELIANCE ON CERTIFICATION.

 A health information trustee who relies in good faith on a 
certification by a government authority or other person and discloses 
protected health information about an enrollee in accordance with this 
subpart shall not be liable to the enrollee for such disclosure.

SEC. 5188. CIVIL PENALTY.

 (a) Violation.--Any health information trustee who the Board 
determines has substantially failed to comply with this subpart shall 
be subject, in addition to any other penalties that may be prescribed 
by law, to a civil penalty of not more than $10,000 for each such 
violation.
 (b) Procedures for Imposition of Penalties.--Section 1128A of the 
Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7a), other than subsections (a) 
and (b) and the second sentence of subsection (f) of that section, 
shall apply to the imposition of a civil monetary penalty under this 
section in the same manner as such provisions apply with respect to the 
imposition of a penalty under section 1128A of that Act.

SEC. 5189. CIVIL ACTION.

 (a) In General.--An individual who is aggrieved by conduct in 
violation of this subpart may bring a civil action to recover--
 (1) the greater of actual damages or liquidated damages of 
 $5,000;
 (2) punitive damages;
 (3) a reasonable attorney's fee and expenses of litigation;
 (4) costs of litigation; and
 (5) such preliminary and equitable relief as the court 
 determines to be appropriate.
 (b) Limitation.--No action may be commenced under this section more 
than 3 years after the date on which the violation was or should 
reasonably have been discovered.

SEC. 5190. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS.

 (a) State Law.--Except as provided in subsections (b), (c), and 
(d), this subpart preempts any State law to the extent that such law is 
inconsistent with this subpart.
 (b) Laws Relating to Public Health.--Nothing in this subpart is 
intended to preempt or operate to the exclusion of any State public 
health law that prevents or regulates disclosure of protected health 
information otherwise allowed under this Act.
 (c) Privileges.--Nothing in this subpart is intended to preempt or 
modify State common or statutory law to the extent such law concerns a 
privilege of a witness or person in a court of the State. This subpart 
does not supersede or modify Federal common or statutory law to the 
extent such law concerns a privilege of a witness or person in a court 
of the United States.
 (d) Certain Duties Under State or Federal Law.--This subpart shall 
not be construed to preempt, supersede, or modify the operation of--
 (1) any law that provides for the reporting of vital 
 statistics such as birth or death information;
 (2) any law requiring the reporting of abuse or neglect 
 information about any individual; or
 (3) subpart II of part E of title XXVI of the Public Health 
 Service Act (relating to notifications of emergency response 
 employees of possible exposure to infectious diseases); or
 (4) any federal law that prevents or regulates disclosure 
 of protected health information.

SEC. 5191. PRIOR WRITTEN CONSENT.

 Except as otherwise provided in this title, no individually 
identifiable health care information may be disclosed, shared or 
otherwise transmitted without the prior, valid, written consent of the 
individuals about whom the information is maintained. Such consent may 
not be provided on a form that is used to authorize or facilitate the 
provision of, or payment for, health care. A separate consent shall be 
obtained for each proposed disclosure under this section. With respect 
to minors or individuals deemed incapable of giving valid written 
consent, State law shall apply as appropriate.

SEC. 5192. PROVIDER IDENTIFIABLE DATA.

 The Board shall establish standards for the disclosure and 
transmission of provider identifiable data.

 PART 3--INTERIM REQUIREMENTS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE SIMPLIFICATION

SEC. 5195. STANDARD BENEFIT FORMS.

 (a) Development.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act, the National Health Board shall develop, 
promulgate, and publish in the Federal Register the following standard 
health care benefit forms:
 (1) An enrollment and disenrollment form to be used to 
 record enrollment and disenrollment in a health benefit plan.
 (2) A clinical encounter record to be used by health 
 benefit plans and health service providers.
 (3) A claim form to be used in the submission of claims for 
 benefits or payment under a health benefit plan.
 (b) Instructions, Definitions, and Codes.--Each standard form 
developed under subsection (a) shall include instructions for 
completing the form that--
 (1) specifically define, to the extent practicable, the 
 data elements contained in the form; and
 (2) standardize any codes or data sets to be used in 
 completing the form.
 (c) Requirements for Adoption of Forms.--
 (1) Health service providers.--On or after the date that is 
 270 days after the publication of the standard forms developed 
 under subsection (a), a health service provider that furnishes 
 items or services in the United States for which payment may be 
 made under a health benefit plan may not--
 (A) maintain records of clinical encounters 
 involving such items or services that are required to 
 be maintained by the National Health Board in a paper 
 form that is not the clinical encounter record 
 promulgated by the Board; or
 (B) submit any claim for benefits or payment for 
 such services to such plan in a paper form that is not 
 the claim form promulgated by the National Health 
 Board.
 (2) Health benefit plans.--On or after the date that is 270 
 days after the publication of the standard forms developed 
 under subsection (a), a health benefit plan may not--
 (A) record enrollment and disenrollment in a paper 
 form that is not the enrollment and disenrollment form 
 promulgated by the National Health Board;
 (B) maintain records of clinical encounters that 
 are required to be maintained by the National Health 
 Board in a paper form that is not the clinical 
 encounter record promulgated by the Board; or
 (C) reject a claim for benefits or payment under 
 the plan on the basis of the form or medium in which 
 the claim is submitted if--
 (i) the claim is submitted on the claim 
 form promulgated by the National Health Board; 
 and
 (ii) the plan accepts claims submitted in 
 paper form.
 (d) Definitions.--For purposes of this subtitle:
 (1) Health benefit plan.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``health benefit plan'' 
 means, except as provided in subparagraphs (B) through 
 (D), any public or private entity or program that 
 provides for payments for health care services, 
 including--
 (i) a group health plan (as defined in 
 section 5000(b)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code 
 of 1986); and
 (ii) any other health insurance 
 arrangement, including any arrangement 
 consisting of a hospital or medical expense 
 incurred policy or certificate, hospital or 
 medical service plan contract, or health 
 maintenance organization subscriber contract.
 (B) Plans excluded.--Such term does not include--
 (i) accident-only, credit, or disability 
 income insurance;
 (ii) coverage issued as a supplement to 
 liability insurance;
 (iii) an individual making payment on the 
 individual's own behalf (or on behalf of a 
 relative or other individual) for deductibles, 
 coinsurance, or services not covered under a 
 health benefit plan; and
 (iv) such other plans as the National 
 Health Board may determine, because of the 
 limitation of benefits to a single type or kind 
 of health care, such as dental services or 
 hospital indemnity plans, or other reasons 
 should not be subject to the requirements of 
 this section.
 (C) Plans included.--Such term includes--
 (i) workers compensation or similar 
 insurance insofar as it relates to workers 
 compensation medical benefits (as defined in 
 section 10000(3)) provided by or through health 
 plans; and
 (ii) automobile medical insurance insofar 
 as it relates to automobile insurance medical 
 benefits (as defined in section 10100(2)) 
 provided by or through health plans.
 (D) Treatment of direct provision of services.--
 Such term does not include a Federal or State program 
 that provides directly for the provision of health 
 services to beneficiaries.
 (2) Health service provider.--The term ``health service 
 provider'' includes a provider of services (as defined in 
 section 1861(u) of the Social Security Act), physician, 
 supplier, and other person furnishing health care services. 
 Such term includes a Federal or State program that provides 
 directly for the provision of health services to beneficiaries.
 (e) Interim Nature of Requirements.--Any requirement with respect 
to a standard form imposed under this part shall cease to be effective 
upon a determination by the Board that the health care data network (as 
defined in section 5102(3)) is operational.

 Subtitle C--Remedies and Enforcement

 PART 1--REVIEW OF BENEFIT DETERMINATIONS FOR ENROLLED INDIVIDUALS

 Subpart A--General Rules

SEC. 5201. HEALTH PLAN CLAIMS PROCEDURE.

 (a) Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
 (1) Claim.--The term ``claim'' means a claim for payment or 
 provision of benefits under a health plan, a request for 
 preauthorization of items or services which is submitted to a 
 health plan prior to receipt of the items or services, or the 
 denial, reduction or termination of any service or request for 
 a referral or reimbursement.
 (2) Individual claimant.--The term ``individual claimant'' 
 with respect to a claim means any individual who submits the 
 claim to a health plan in connection with the individual's 
 enrollment under the plan, or on whose behalf the claim is 
 submitted to the plan by a provider.
 (3) Provider claimant.--The term ``provider claimant'' with 
 respect to a claim means any provider who submits the claim to 
 a health plan with respect to items or services provided to an 
 individual enrolled under the plan.
 (b) General Rules Governing Treatment of Claims.--
 (1) Adequate notice of disposition of claim.--In any case 
 in which a claim is submitted in complete form to a health 
 plan, the plan shall provide to the individual claimant and any 
 provider claimant with respect to the claim a written notice of 
 the plan's approval or denial of the claim within 15 days after 
 the date of the submission of the claim. The notice to the 
 individual claimant shall be written in language calculated to 
 be understood by the typical individual enrolled under the plan 
 and in a form which takes into account accessibility to the 
 information by individuals whose primary language is not 
 English. In the case of a denial of the claim, the notice shall 
 be provided within 5 days after the date of the determination 
 to deny the claim, and shall set forth the specific reasons for 
 the denial. Such notice shall include an explanation of the 
 specific reasons and facts underlying the decision to reduce or 
 fail to provide services or pay the claim. The notice of a 
 denial shall clearly explain the right to appeal the denial 
 under paragraph (2) and a description of the process for 
 appealing such decision sufficient to allow the claimant to 
 initiate an appeal and submit evidence to the decision maker in 
 support of the position of the claimant. Failure by any plan to 
 comply with the requirements of this paragraph with respect to 
 any claim submitted to the plan shall be treated as approval by 
 the plan of the claim.
 (2) Plan's duty to review denials upon timely request.--The 
 plan shall review its denial of the claim if an individual 
 claimant or provider claimant with respect to the claim submits 
 to the plan a written request for reconsideration of the claim 
 after receipt of written notice from the plan of the denial. 
 The plan shall allow any such claimant not less than 60 days, 
 after receipt of written notice from the plan of the denial, to 
 submit the claimant's request for reconsideration of the claim.
 (3) Time limit for review.--The plan shall complete any 
 review required under paragraph (2), and shall provide the 
 individual claimant and any provider claimant with respect to 
 the claim written notice of the plan's decision on the claim 
 after reconsideration pursuant to the review, within 30 days 
 after the date of the receipt of the request for 
 reconsideration.
 (4) De novo reviews.--Any review required under paragraph 
 (2)--
 (A) shall be de novo,
 (B) shall be conducted by an individual who did not 
 make the initial decision denying the claim and who is 
 authorized to approve the claim, and
 (C) shall include review by a qualified physician 
 in the same speciality as the treating physician if the 
 resolution of any issues involved requires medical 
 expertise.
 (c) Treatment of Urgent Requests to Plans for Preauthorization.--
 (1) In general.--This subsection applies in the case of any 
 claim submitted by an individual claimant or a provider 
 claimant consisting of a request for preauthorization of items 
 or services (other than emergency services which under section 
 1406(b) may not be subject to preauthorization) which is 
 accompanied by an attestation that--
 (A) failure to immediately provide the items or 
 services could reasonably be expected to result in--
 (i) placing the health of the individual 
 claimant (or, with respect to an individual 
 claimant who is a pregnant woman, the health of 
 the woman or her unborn child) in serious 
 jeopardy,
 (ii) serious impairment to bodily 
 functions, or
 (iii) serious dysfunction of any bodily 
 organ or part,
 or
 (B) immediate provision of the items or services is 
 necessary because the individual claimant has made or 
 is at serious risk of making an attempt to harm such 
 individual claimant or another individual.
 (2) Shortened time limit for consideration of requests for 
 preauthorization.--Notwithstanding subsection (b)(1), a health 
 plan shall approve or deny any claim described in paragraph (1) 
 within 12 hours after submission of the claim to the plan. 
 Failure by the plan to comply with the requirements of this 
 paragraph with respect to the claim shall be treated as 
 approval by the plan of the claim.
 (3) Expedited exhaustion of plan remedies.--Any claim 
 described in paragraph (1) which is denied by the plan shall be 
 treated as a claim with respect to which all remedies under the 
 plan provided pursuant to this section are exhausted, 
 irrespective of any review provided under subsection (b)(2).
 (4) Denial of previously authorized claims not permitted.--
 In any case in which a health plan approves a claim described 
 in paragraph (1)--
 (A) the plan may not subsequently deny payment or 
 provision of benefits pursuant to the claim, unless the 
 plan makes a showing of an intentional 
 misrepresentation of a material fact by the individual 
 claimant, and
 (B) in the case of a violation of subparagraph (A) 
 in connection with the claim, all remedies under the 
 plan provided pursuant to this section with respect to 
 the claim shall be treated as exhausted.
 (d) Time Limit for Determination of Incompleteness of Claim.--For 
purposes of this section--
 (1) any claim submitted by an individual claimant and 
 accepted by a provider serving under contract with a health 
 plan and any claim described in subsection (b)(1) shall be 
 treated with respect to the individual claimant as submitted in 
 complete form, and
 (2) any other claim for benefits under the plan shall be 
 treated as filed in complete form as of 10 days after the date 
 of the submission of the claim, unless the plan provides to the 
 individual claimant and any provider claimant, within such 
 period, a written notice of any required matter remaining to be 
 filed in order to complete the claim.
Any filing by the individual claimant or the provider claimant of 
additional matter requested by the plan pursuant to paragraph (2) shall 
be treated for purposes of this section as an initial filing of the 
claim.
 (e) Additional Notice and Disclosure Requirements for Health 
Plans.--In the case of a denial of a claim for benefits under a health 
plan, the plan shall include, together with the specific reasons 
provided to the individual claimant and any provider claimant under 
subsection (b)(1)--
 (1) if the denial is based in whole or in part on a 
 determination that the claim is for an item or service which is 
 not covered by the comprehensive benefit package or exceeds 
 payment rates under the applicable fee schedule, the factual 
 basis for the determination,
 (2) if the denial is based in whole or in part on exclusion 
 of coverage with respect to services because the services are 
 determined to comprise an experimental treatment or 
 investigatory procedure, the medical basis for the 
 determination and a description of the process used in making 
 the determination, and
 (3) if the denial is based in whole or in part on a 
 determination that the treatment is not medically necessary or 
 appropriate or is inconsistent with the plan's practice 
 guidelines, the medical basis for the determination, the 
 guidelines used in making the determination, and a description 
 of the process used in making the determination.
 (f) Waiver of Rights Prohibited.--A health plan may not require any 
party to waive any right under the plan or this Act as a condition for 
approval of any claim under the plan, except to the extent otherwise 
specified in a formal settlement agreement.

SEC. 5202. REVIEW IN AREA COMPLAINT REVIEW OFFICES OF GRIEVANCES BASED 
 ON ACTS OR PRACTICES BY HEALTH PLANS.

 (a) Complaint Review Offices.--
 (1) In general.--In accordance with rules which shall be 
 prescribed by the Secretary of Labor, in consultation with the 
 National Health Board, each State shall establish and maintain 
 a complaint review office for each health care coverage area 
 established by such State. According to designations which 
 shall be made by each State under regulations of the Secretary 
 of Labor, in consultation with such Board, the complaint review 
 office for a health care coverage area established by such 
 State shall also serve as the complaint review office for large 
 group sponsors operating in the State with respect to 
 individuals who are enrolled under health plans maintained by 
 such sponsors and who reside within the area of the health care 
 coverage area.
 (2) Health systems not established by states.--In the case 
 of any health care system established in any State by the 
 Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Secretary of Health 
 and Human Services shall assume all duties and obligations of 
 such State under this part in accordance with the applicable 
 regulations of the Secretary of Labor, in consultation with the 
 National Health Board, under this part.
 (b) Filings of Complaints by Aggrieved Persons.--In the case of any 
person who is aggrieved by--
 (1) any act or practice engaged in by any health plan which 
 consists of or results in denial of payment or provision of 
 benefits under the plan or delay in the payment or provision of 
 benefits, or
 (2) any act or practice engaged in by any other plan 
 maintained in a health care coverage area or by a large group 
 sponsor which consists of or results in denial of payment or 
 provision of benefits under a supplemental benefit policy 
 described in section 1421(b)(1) or a cost sharing policy 
 described in section 1421(b)(2) or delay in the payment or 
 provision of the benefits,
if the denial or delay consists of a failure to comply with the terms 
of the plan (including the provision of benefits in full when due in 
accordance with the terms of the plan), or with the applicable 
requirements of this Act, such person may file a complaint with the 
appropriate complaint review office.
 (c) Exhaustion of Plan Remedies.--Any complaint including a claim 
to which section 5201 applies may not be filed until the complainant 
has exhausted all remedies provided under the plan with respect to the 
claim in accordance with such section.
 (d) Form of Complaint.--The complaint shall be in writing under 
oath or affirmation, shall set forth the complaint in a manner 
calculated to give notice of the nature of the complaint, and shall 
contain such information as may be prescribed in regulations of the 
Secretary of Labor.
 (e) Notice of Filing.--The complaint review office shall serve by 
certified mail a notice of the complaint (including the date, place, 
and circumstances of the alleged violation) on the person or persons 
alleged in the complaint to have committed the violation within 10 days 
after the filing of the complaint.
 (f) Time Limitation.--Complaints may not be brought under this 
section with respect to any violation later than one year after the 
date on which the complaining party knows or should have reasonably 
known that a violation has occurred. This subsection shall not prevent 
the subsequent amending of a complaint.

SEC. 5203. INITIAL PROCEEDINGS IN COMPLAINT REVIEW OFFICES.

 (a) Elections.--Whenever a complaint is brought to the complaint 
review office under section 5202(b), the complaint review office shall 
provide the complainant with an opportunity, in such form and manner as 
shall be prescribed in regulations of the Secretary of Labor, to elect 
one of the following:
 (1) to forego further proceedings in the complaint review 
 office and rely on remedies available in a court of competent 
 jurisdiction, with respect to any matter in the complaint,
 (2) to submit the complaint as a dispute under the Early 
 Resolution Program established under subpart B and thereby 
 suspend further review proceedings under this section pending 
 termination of proceedings under the Program, or
 (3) in any case in which an election under paragraph (2) is 
 not made, or such an election was made but resolution of all 
 matters in the complaint was not obtained upon termination of 
 proceedings pursuant to the election by settlement agreement or 
 otherwise, to proceed with the complaint to a hearing in the 
 complaint review office under section 5204 regarding the 
 unresolved matters.
 (b) Duty of Complaint Review Office.--The complaint review office 
shall provide (in a linguistically appropriate manner) an explanation 
to complainants bringing complaints to the office concerning the legal 
and other ramifications of each option available under this section.
 (c) Effect of Participation in Early Resolution Program.--Any 
matter in a complaint brought to the complaint review office which is 
included in a dispute which is timely submitted to the Early Resolution 
Program established under subpart B shall not be assigned to a hearing 
under section 5204 unless the proceedings under the Program with 
respect to the dispute are terminated without settlement or resolution 
of the dispute with respect to such matter. Upon termination of any 
proceedings regarding a dispute submitted to the Program, the 
applicability of this section to any matter in a complaint which was 
included in the dispute shall not be affected by participation in the 
proceedings, except to the extent otherwise required under the terms of 
any settlement agreement or other formal resolution obtained in the 
proceedings.

SEC. 5204. HEARINGS BEFORE HEARING OFFICERS IN COMPLAINT REVIEW 
 OFFICES.

 (a) Hearing Process.--
 (1) Assignment of complaints to hearing officers and notice 
 to parties.--
 (A) In general.--In the case of an election under 
 section 5203(a)(3)--
 (i) the complaint review office shall 
 assign the complaint, and each motion in 
 connection with the complaint, to a hearing 
 officer employed by the State in the office; 
 and
 (ii) the hearing officer shall have the 
 power to issue and cause to be served upon the 
 plan named in the complaint a copy of the 
 complaint and a notice of hearing before the 
 hearing officer at a place fixed in the notice, 
 not less than 5 days after the serving of the 
 complaint.
 (B) Qualifications for hearing officers.--No 
 individual may serve in a complaint review office as a 
 hearing officer unless the individual meets standards 
 which shall be prescribed by the Secretary of Labor. 
 Such standards shall include experience, training, 
 ability to communicate with the enrollee, affiliations, 
 diligence, absence of actual or potential conflicts of 
 interest, and other qualifications deemed relevant by 
 the Secretary of Labor. At no time shall a hearing 
 officer have any official, financial, or personal 
 conflict of interest with respect to issues in 
 controversy before the hearing officer.
 (2) Amendment of complaints.--Any such complaint may be 
 amended by the hearing officer conducting the hearing, upon the 
 motion of the complainant, in the hearing officer's discretion 
 at any time prior to the issuance of an order based thereon.
 (3) Answers.--The party against whom the complaint is filed 
 shall have the right to file an answer to the original or 
 amended complaint and to appear in person or otherwise and give 
 testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint.
 (b) Additional Parties.--In the discretion of the hearing officer 
conducting the hearing, any other person may be allowed to intervene in 
the proceeding and to present testimony.
 (c) Hearings.--
 (1) De novo hearing.--Each hearing officer shall hear 
 complaints and motions de novo.
 (2) Testimony.--The testimony taken by the hearing officer 
 shall be reduced to writing. Thereafter, the hearing officer, 
 in his or her discretion, upon notice may provide for the 
 taking of further testimony or hear argument.
 (3) Authority of hearing officers.--The hearing officer may 
 compel by subpoena the attendance of witnesses and the 
 production of evidence at any designated place or hearing. In 
 case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena lawfully issued 
 under this paragraph and upon application of the hearing 
 officer, an appropriate district court of the United States may 
 issue an order requiring compliance with the subpoena and any 
 failure to obey the order may be punished by the court as a 
 contempt thereof. The hearing officer may also seek enforcement 
 of the subpoena in a State court of competent jurisdiction.
 (4) Expedited hearings.--Notwithstanding section 5203 and 
 the preceding provisions of this section, upon receipt of a 
 complaint containing a claim described in section 5201(c)(1), 
 the complaint review office shall promptly provide the 
 complainant with the opportunity to make an election under 
 section 5203(a)(3) and assignment to a hearing on the complaint 
 before a hearing officer. The complaint review office shall 
 ensure that such a hearing commences not later than 24 hours 
 after receipt of the complaint by the complaint hearing office 
 and not later than 3 days after the receipt of a complaint, the 
 Complaint Review Office shall provide a decision.
 (d) Decision of Hearing Officer.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 120 days after the date on 
 which a complaint is assigned under this section, the hearing 
 officer shall decide if the preponderance of the evidence 
 justifies the denial of services and whether to decide in favor 
 of the complainant with respect to each alleged act or 
 practice. Each such decision--
 (A) shall include the hearing officer's findings of 
 fact, and
 (B) shall constitute the hearing officer's final 
 disposition of the proceedings.
 (2) Decisions finding in favor of complainant.--If the 
 hearing officer's decision includes a determination that any 
 party named in the complaint has engaged in or is engaged in an 
 act or practice described in section 5202(b), the hearing 
 officer shall issue and cause to be served on such party an 
 order which requires such party--
 (A) to cease and desist from such act or practice,
 (B) to provide the benefits due under the terms of 
 the plan and to otherwise comply with the terms of the 
 plan and the applicable requirements of this Act,
 (C) to pay to the complainant prejudgment interest 
 on the actual costs incurred in obtaining the items and 
 services at issue in the complaint,
 (D) to pay to the prevailing complainant a 
 reasonable attorney's fee, reasonable expert witness 
 fees, and other reasonable costs relating to the 
 hearing on the charges on which the complainant 
 prevails, and
 (E) to provide other appropriate relief.
 (3) Decisions not in favor of complainant.--If the hearing 
 officer's decision includes a determination that the party 
 named in the complaint has not engaged in or is not engaged in 
 an act or practice referred to in section 5202(b), the hearing 
 officer--
 (A) shall include in the decision a dismissal of 
 the charge in the complaint relating to the act or 
 practice, and
 (B) upon a finding that such charge is frivolous, 
 shall issue and cause to be served on the complainant 
 an order which requires the complainant to pay to such 
 party a reasonable attorney's fee, reasonable expert 
 witness fees, and other reasonable costs relating to 
 the proceedings on such charge.
 (4) Submission and service of decisions.--The hearing 
 officer shall submit each decision to the complaint review 
 office at the conclusion of the proceedings and the office 
 shall cause a copy of the decision to be served on the parties 
 to the proceedings.
 (e) Review.--
 (1) In general.--The decision of the hearing officer shall 
 be final and binding upon all parties. Except as provided in 
 paragraph (2), any party to the complaint may, within 30 days 
 after service of the decision by the complaint review office, 
 file an appeal of the decision with the Federal Health Plan 
 Review Board under section 5205 in such form and manner as may 
 be prescribed by such Board.
 (2) Exception.--The decision in the case of an expedited 
 hearing under subsection (c)(4) shall not be subject to review.
 (f) Court Enforcement of Orders.--
 (1) In general.--If a decision of the hearing officer in 
 favor of the complainant is not appealed under section 5205, 
 the complainant may petition any court of competent 
 jurisdiction for enforcement of the order. In any such 
 proceeding, the order of the hearing officer shall not be 
 subject to review.
 (2) Awarding of costs.--In any action for court enforcement 
 under this subsection, a prevailing complainant shall be 
 entitled to a reasonable attorney's fee, reasonable expert 
 witness fees, and other reasonable costs relating to such 
 action.

SEC. 5205. REVIEW BY FEDERAL HEALTH PLAN REVIEW BOARD.

 (a) Establishment and Membership.--The Secretary of Labor, in 
consultation with the National Health Board, shall establish by 
regulation a Federal Health Plan Review Board (hereinafter in this 
subtitle referred to as the ``Review Board''). The Review Board shall 
be composed of 5 members appointed by the Secretary of Labor, in 
consultation with the National Health Board, from among persons who by 
reason of training, education, or experience are qualified to carry out 
the functions of the Review Board under this subtitle, and be balanced 
to fairly represent all interested parties. The Secretary of Labor, in 
consultation with the National Health Board, shall prescribe such rules 
as are necessary for the orderly transaction of proceedings by the 
Review Board. Every official act of the Review Board shall be entered 
of record, and its hearings and records shall be open to the public.
 (b) Review Process.--The Review Board shall ensure, in accordance 
with rules prescribed by the Secretary of Labor, in consultation with 
the National Health Board, that reasonable notice is provided for each 
appeal before the Review Board of a hearing officer's decision under 
section 5304, and shall provide for the orderly consideration of 
arguments by any party to the hearing upon which the hearing officer's 
decision is based. In the discretion of the Review Board, any other 
person may be allowed to intervene in the proceeding and to present 
written argument. The National Health Board may intervene in the 
proceeding as a matter of right.
 (c) Scope of Review.--The Review Board shall review the decision of 
the hearing officer from which the appeal is made, except that the 
review shall be only for the purposes of determining--
 (1) whether the determination is supported by substantial 
 evidence on the record considered as a whole,
 (2) in the case of any interpretation by the hearing 
 officer of contractual terms (irrespective of the extent to 
 which extrinsic evidence was considered), whether the 
 determination is supported by a preponderance of the evidence,
 (3) whether the determination is in excess of statutory 
 jurisdiction, authority, or limitations, or in violation of a 
 statutory right, or
 (4) whether the determination is without observance of 
 procedure required by law.
 (d) Decision of Review Board.--The decision of the hearing officer 
as affirmed or modified by the Review Board (or any reversal by the 
Review Board of the hearing officer's final disposition of the 
proceedings) shall become the final order of the Review Board and 
binding on all parties, subject to review under subsection (e). The 
Review Board shall cause a copy of its decision to be served on the 
parties to the proceedings not later than 5 days after the date of the 
decision.
 (e) Review of Final Orders.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than 60 days after the entry of 
 the final order, any person aggrieved by any such final order 
 under which the amount or value in controversy exceeds $10,000 
 may seek a review of the order in the United States court of 
 appeals for the circuit in which the violation is alleged to 
 have occurred or in which the complainant resides.
 (2) Further review.--Upon the filing of the record with the 
 court, the jurisdiction of the court shall be exclusive and its 
 judgment shall be final, except that the judgment shall be 
 subject to review by the Supreme Court of the United States 
 upon writ of certiorari or certification as provided in section 
 1254 of title 28 of the United States Code.
 (3) Enforcement decree in original review.--If, upon appeal 
 of an order under paragraph (1), the United States court of 
 appeals does not reverse the order, the court shall have the 
 jurisdiction to make and enter a decree enforcing the order of 
 the Review Board.
 (f) Awarding of Attorneys' Fees and Other Costs and Expenses.--In 
any proceeding before the Review Board under this section or any 
judicial proceeding under subsection (e), the Review Board or the court 
(as the case may be) shall award to a prevailing complainant reasonable 
costs and expenses (including a reasonable attorney's fee) on the 
causes on which the complainant prevails.

SEC. 5206. CIVIL MONEY PENALTIES.

 (a) Denial or Delay in Payment or Provision of Benefits.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Labor, in consultation 
 with the National Health Board, may assess a civil penalty 
 against any health plan, or against any other plan in 
 connection with benefits provided thereunder under a 
 supplemental benefit policy described in section 1421(b)(1) or 
 a cost sharing policy described in section 1421(b)(2), for 
 unreasonable denial or delay in the payment or provision of 
 benefits thereunder, in an amount not to exceed--
 (A) $25,000 per violation, or $75,000 per violation 
 in the case of a finding of bad faith on the part of 
 the plan, and
 (B) in the case of a finding of a pattern or 
 practice of such violations engaged in by the plan, 
 $1,000,000 in addition to the total amount of penalties 
 assessed under subparagraph (A) with respect to such 
 violations.
 For purposes of subparagraph (A), each violation with respect 
 to any single individual shall be treated as a separate 
 violation.
 (2) Civil action to enforce civil penalty.--The Secretary 
 of Labor, in consultation with the National Health Board, may 
 commence a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction 
 to enforce a civil penalty assessed under paragraph (1).
 (3) Supplemental plans.--Nothing in this section shall be 
 construed to limit the rights and remedies available under 
 State law with respect to supplemental benefit plans.
 (b) Civil Penalties for Certain Other Actions.--The Secretary of 
Labor, in consultation with the National Health Board, may assess a 
civil penalty described in section 5412(b)(1) against any experience-
rated health plan, or against any other plan sponsored by a large group 
sponsor in connection with benefits provided thereunder under a cost 
sharing policy described in section 1421(b)(2), for any action 
described in section 5412(a). The Secretary of Labor, in consultation 
with the National Health Board, may initiate proceedings to impose such 
penalty in the same manner as the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services may initiate proceedings under section 5412 with respect to 
actions described in section 5412(a).

 Subpart B--Early Resolution Programs

SEC. 5211. ESTABLISHMENT OF EARLY RESOLUTION PROGRAMS IN COMPLAINT 
 REVIEW OFFICES.

 (a) Establishment of Programs.--Each State shall establish and 
maintain an Early Resolution Program in each complaint review office in 
such State. The Program shall include--
 (1) the establishment and maintenance of forums for 
 mediation of disputes in accordance with this subpart, and
 (2) the establishment and maintenance of such forums for 
 other forms of alternative dispute resolution (including 
 binding arbitration) as may be prescribed in regulations of the 
 Secretary of Labor, in consultation with the National Health 
 Board.
Each State shall ensure that the standards applied in Early Resolution 
Programs administered in such State which apply to any form of 
alternative dispute resolution described in paragraph (2) and which 
relate to time requirements, qualifications of facilitators, 
arbitrators, or other mediators, and confidentiality are at least 
equivalent to the standards which apply to mediation proceedings under 
this subpart.
 (b) Duties of Complaint Review Offices.--Each complaint review 
office in a State--
 (1) shall administer its Early Resolution Program in 
 accordance with regulations of the Secretary of Labor, in 
 consultation with the National Health Board,
 (2) shall, pursuant to subsection (a)(1)--
 (A) recruit and train individuals to serve as 
 facilitators for mediation proceedings under the Early 
 Resolution Program from attorneys who have the 
 requisite expertise for such service, which shall be 
 specified in regulations of the Secretary of Labor, in 
 consultation with the National Health Board,
 (B) provide meeting sites, maintain records, and 
 provide facilitators with administrative support staff, 
 and
 (C) establish and maintain attorney referral 
 panels,
 (3) shall ensure that, upon the filing of a complaint with 
 the office, the complainant is adequately apprised of the 
 complainant's options for review under this part, and
 (4) shall monitor and evaluate the Program on an ongoing 
 basis.

SEC. 5212. INITIATION OF PARTICIPATION IN MEDIATION PROCEEDINGS.

 (a) Eligibility of Cases for Submission to Early Resolution 
Program.--A dispute may be submitted to the Early Resolution Program 
only if the following requirements are met with respect to the dispute:
 (1) Nature of dispute.--The dispute consists of an 
 assertion by an individual enrolled under a health plan of one 
 or more claims against the health plan for payment or provision 
 of benefits, or against any other plan community-rated health 
 plan or large group sponsor sponsoring the health plan with 
 respect to benefits provided under a supplemental benefit 
 policy described in section 1421(b)(1) or a cost sharing policy 
 described in section 1421(b)(2), based on alleged coverage 
 under the plan, and a denial of the claims, or a denial of 
 appropriate reimbursement based on the claims, by the plan.
 (2) Nature of disputed claim.--Each claim consists of--
 (A) a claim for payment or provision of benefits 
 under the plan; or
 (B) a request for information or documents the 
 disclosure of which is required under this Act 
 (including claims of entitlement to disclosure based on 
 colorable claims to rights to benefits under the plan).
 (b) Filing of Election.--A complainant with a dispute which is 
eligible for submission to the Early Resolution Program may make the 
election under section 5203(a)(2) to submit the dispute to mediation 
proceedings under the Program not later than 15 days after the date the 
complaint is filed with the complaint review office under section 
5202(b).
 (c) Agreement to Participate.--
 (1) Election by claimant.--A complainant may elect 
 participation in the mediation proceedings only by entering 
 into a written participation agreement (including an agreement 
 to comply with the rules of the Program and consent for the 
 complaint review office to contact the health plan regarding 
 the agreement), and by releasing plan records to the Program 
 for the exclusive use of the facilitator assigned to the 
 dispute.
 (2) Participation by plans or health benefits 
 contractors.--Each party whose participation in the mediation 
 proceedings has been elected by a claimant pursuant to 
 paragraph (1) shall participate in, and cooperate fully with, 
 the proceedings. The claims review office shall provide such 
 party with a copy of the participation agreement described in 
 paragraph (1), together with a written description of the 
 Program. Such party shall submit the copy of the agreement, 
 together with its authorized signature signifying receipt of 
 notice of the agreement, to the claims review office, and shall 
 include in the submission to the claims review office a copy of 
 the written record of the plan claims procedure completed 
 pursuant to section 5201 with respect to the dispute and all 
 relevant plan documents. The relevant documents shall include 
 all documents under which the plan is or was administered or 
 operated, including copies of any insurance contracts under 
 which benefits are or were provided and any fee or 
 reimbursement schedules for health care providers.

SEC. 5213. MEDIATION PROCEEDINGS.

 (a) Role of Facilitator.--In the course of mediation proceedings 
under the Early Resolution Program, the facilitator assigned to the 
dispute shall prepare the parties for a conference regarding the 
dispute and serve as a neutral mediator at such conference, with the 
goal of achieving settlement of the dispute.
 (b) Preparations for Conference.--In advance of convening the 
conference, after identifying the necessary parties and confirming that 
the case is eligible for the Program, the facilitator shall analyze the 
record of the claims procedure conducted pursuant to section 5201 and 
any position papers submitted by the parties to determine if further 
case development is needed to clarify the legal and factual issues in 
dispute, and whether there is any need for additional information and 
documents.
 (c) Conference.--Upon convening the conference, the facilitator 
shall assist the parties in identifying undisputed issues and exploring 
settlement. If settlement is reached, the facilitator shall assist in 
the preparation of a written settlement agreement. If no settlement is 
reached, the facilitator shall present the facilitator's evaluation, 
including an assessment of the parties' positions, the likely outcome 
of further administrative action or litigation, and suggestions for 
narrowing the issues in dispute.
 (d) Time Limit.--The facilitator shall ensure that mediation 
proceedings with respect to any dispute under the Early Resolution 
Program shall be completed within 120 days after the election to 
participate. The parties may agree to one extension of the proceedings 
by not more than 30 days if the proceedings are suspended to obtain an 
agency ruling or to reconvene the conference in a subsequent session.
 (e) Inapplicability of Formal Rules.--Formal rules of evidence 
shall not apply to mediation proceedings under the Early Resolution 
Program. All statements made and evidence presented in the proceedings 
shall be admissible in the proceedings. The facilitator shall be the 
sole judge of the proper weight to be afforded to each submission. The 
parties to mediation proceedings under the Program shall not be 
required to make statements or present evidence under oath.
 (f) Representation.--Parties may participate pro se or be 
represented by attorneys throughout the proceedings of the Early 
Resolution Program.
 (g) Confidentiality.--
 (1) In general.--Under regulations of the Secretary of 
 Labor, rules similar to the rules under section 574 of title 5, 
 United States Code (relating to confidentiality in dispute 
 resolution proceedings) shall apply to the mediation 
 proceedings under the Early Resolution Program.
 (2) Civil remedies.--The Secretary of Labor may assess a 
 civil penalty against any person who discloses information in 
 violation of the regulations prescribed pursuant to paragraph 
 (1) in the amount of three times the amount of the claim 
 involved. The Secretary of Labor may bring a civil action to 
 enforce such civil penalty in any court of competent 
 jurisdiction.

SEC. 5214. LEGAL EFFECT OF PARTICIPATION IN MEDIATION PROCEEDINGS.

 (a) Process Nonbinding.--Findings and conclusions made in the 
mediation proceedings of the Early Resolution Program shall be treated 
as advisory in nature and nonbinding. Except as provided in subsection 
(b), the rights of the parties under subpart A shall not be affected by 
participation in the Program.
 (b) Resolution Through Settlement Agreement.--If a case is settled 
through participation in mediation proceedings under the Program, the 
facilitator shall assist the parties in drawing up an agreement which 
shall constitute, upon signature of the parties, a binding contract 
between the parties, which shall be enforceable under section 5215.
 (c) Preservation of Rights of Non-Parties.--The settlement 
agreement shall not have the effect of waiving or otherwise affecting 
any rights to review under subpart A, or any other right under this Act 
or the plan, with respect to any person who is not a party to the 
settlement agreement.

SEC. 5215. ENFORCEMENT OF SETTLEMENT AGREEMENTS.

 (a) Enforcement.--Any party to a settlement agreement entered 
pursuant to mediation proceedings under this subpart may petition any 
court of competent jurisdiction for the enforcement of the agreement, 
by filing in the court a written petition praying that the agreement be 
enforced. In such a proceeding, the order of the hearing officer shall 
not be subject to review.
 (b) Court Review.--It shall be the duty of the court to advance on 
the docket and to expedite to the greatest possible extent the 
disposition of any petition filed under this section, with due 
deference to the role of settlement agreements under this part in 
achieving prompt resolution of disputes involving health plans.
 (c) Awarding of Attorney's Fees and Other Costs and Expenses.--In 
any action by an individual enrolled under a health plan for court 
enforcement under this section, a prevailing plaintiff shall be 
entitled to reasonable costs and expenses (including a reasonable 
attorney's fee and reasonable expert witness fees) on the charges on 
which the plaintiff prevails.

SEC. 5216. DUE PROCESS FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS.

 (a) Publicly Available Standards and Process.--Each health plan 
shall establish and utilize--
 (1) publicly available standards for contracting with 
 health care providers; and
 (2) a publicly available process for dismissing such 
 providers or failing to renew contracts with such providers.
 (b) Notice Requirement.--
 (1) In general.--The process established by a health plan 
 under subsection (a) shall include reasonable notification to a 
 health care provider of a decision to dismiss such provider or 
 not to renew a contract with such provider before such decision 
 takes effect.
 (2) Exception.--The notice required under paragraph (1) 
 shall not apply if failure to dismiss a provider or renewing a 
 provider's contract would adversely affect the health or safety 
 of a patient.
 (3) Contents of notice.--Each notice to a health care 
 provider under paragraph (1) shall contain the reasons for the 
 dismissal or failure to renew. Such reasons shall be consistent 
 with the standards established under subsection (a).
 (c) Review.--The process established by a health plan under 
subsection (a) shall include an opportunity for review of the health 
plan's action by a health care provider who is dismissed by a health 
plan or with respect to whom a health plan fails to renew a contract. 
Such review shall be conducted by--
 (1) the provider's peers who have contracts with, or are 
 employed by, the health plan; and
 (2) if there is mutual consent of the provider and the 
 health plan, one or more enrollees in the health plan.
A health care provider may have an attorney present in connection with 
any review under this subsection if the provider notifies the health 
plan that an attorney will be present in advance of the review 
proceeding.
 (d) Effect on Other Laws.--The provisions of this section shall not 
supersede any other provision of Federal or State law.

 PART 2--ADDITIONAL REMEDIES AND ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS

SEC. 5231. JUDICIAL REVIEW OF FEDERAL ACTION ON STATE SYSTEMS.

 (a) In General.--Any State that is aggrieved by a determination by 
the National Health Board under subpart B of part 1 of subtitle F of 
title I shall be entitled to judicial review of such determination in 
accordance with this section.
 (b) Judicial Review.--
 (1) Jurisdiction.--The courts of appeals of the United 
 States (other than the United States Court of Appeals for the 
 Federal Circuit) shall have jurisdiction to review a 
 determination described in subsection (a), to affirm the 
 determination, or to set it aside, in whole or in part. A 
 judgment of a court of appeals in such an action shall be 
 subject to review by the Supreme Court of the United States 
 upon certiorari or certification as provided in section 1254 of 
 title 28, United States Code.
 (2) Petition for review.--A State that desires judicial 
 review of a determination described in subsection (a) shall, 
 within 30 days after it has been notified of such 
 determination, file with the United States court of appeals for 
 the circuit in which the State is located a petition for review 
 of such determination. A copy of the petition shall be 
 transmitted by the clerk of the court to the National Health 
 Board, and the Board shall file in the court the record of the 
 proceedings on which the determination or action was based, as 
 provided in section 2112 of title 28, United States Code.
 (3) Scope of review.--The findings of fact of the National 
 Health Board, if supported by substantial evidence, shall be 
 conclusive; but the court, for good cause shown, may remand the 
 case to the Board to take further evidence, and the Board may 
 make new or modified findings of fact and may modify its 
 previous action, and shall certify to the court the record of 
 the further proceedings. Such new or modified findings of fact 
 shall likewise be conclusive if supported by substantial 
 evidence.

SEC. 5232. ADMINISTRATIVE AND JUDICIAL REVIEW RELATING TO COST 
 CONTAINMENT.

 There shall be no administrative or judicial review of any 
determination by the National Health Board respecting any matter under 
subtitle A of title VI.

SEC. 5233. CIVIL ENFORCEMENT.

 Unless otherwise provided in this Act, the district courts of the 
United States shall have jurisdiction of civil actions brought by--
 (1) the Secretary of Labor, in consultation with the 
 National Health Board, to enforce any final order of such 
 Secretary or to collect any civil monetary penalty assessed by 
 such Secretary under this Act; and
 (2) the Secretary of Health and Human Services to enforce 
 any final order of such Secretary or to collect any civil 
 monetary penalty assessed by such Secretary under this Act.

SEC. 5234. PRIORITY OF CERTAIN BANKRUPTCY CLAIMS.

 Section 507(a)(8) of title 11, United States Code, is amended to 
read as follows:
 ``(8) Eighth, allowed unsecured claims--
 ``(A) based upon any commitment by the debtor to 
 the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the 
 Resolution Trust Corporation, the Director of the 
 Office of Thrift Supervision, the Comptroller of the 
 Currency, or the Board of Governors of the Federal 
 Reserve System, or their predecessors or successors, to 
 maintain the capital of an insured depository 
 institution;
 ``(B) for payments under subtitle B of title IV of 
 the Health Security Act owed to a State (as defined in 
 section 1301 of such Act);
 ``(C) for payments owed to an experienced-rated 
 health plan under trusteeship of the Secretary of Labor 
 under section 1395 of the Health Security Act; or
 ``(D) for assessments and related amounts owed to 
 the Secretary of Labor under section 1397 of the Health 
 Security Act.''.

SEC. 5235. PRIVATE RIGHT TO ENFORCE STATE RESPONSIBILITIES.

 The failure of a participating State to carry out a responsibility 
applicable to participating States under this Act constitutes a 
deprivation of rights secured by this Act for the purposes of section 
1977 of the Revised Statutes of the United States (42 U.S.C. 1983). In 
an action brought under such section, the court shall exercise 
jurisdiction without regard to whether the aggrieved person has 
exhausted any administrative or other remedies that may be provided by 
law.

SEC. 5236. PRIVATE RIGHT TO ENFORCE FEDERAL RESPONSIBILITIES IN 
 OPERATING A SYSTEM IN A STATE.

 (a) In General.--The failure of the Secretary of Health and Human 
Services to carry out a responsibility under section 1522 (relating to 
State participation) confers an enforceable right of action on any 
person who is aggrieved by such failure. Such a person may commence a 
civil action against the Secretary in an appropriate State court or 
district court of the United States.
 (b) Exhaustion of Remedies.--In an action under subsection (a), the 
court shall exercise jurisdiction without regard to whether the 
aggrieved person has exhausted any administrative or other remedies 
that may be provided by law.
 (c) Relief.--In an action under subsection (a), if the court finds 
that a failure described in such subsection has occurred, the aggrieved 
person may recover compensatory damages and the court may award any 
other appropriate relief.
 (d) Attorney's Fees.--In an action under subsection (a), the court, 
in its discretion, may allow the prevailing party, other than the 
United States, a reasonable attorney's fee (including expert fees) as 
part of the costs, and the United States shall be liable for costs the 
same as a private person.

SEC. 5237. PRIVATE RIGHT TO ENFORCE RESPONSIBILITIES OF COOPERATIVES.

 (a) In General.--The failure of a consumer purchasing cooperative, 
large group sponsor, or health plan to carry out a responsibility 
applicable to the entity under this Act confers an enforceable right of 
action on any person who is aggrieved by such failure. Such a person 
may commence a civil action against the cooperative, large group 
sponsor or health plan in an appropriate State court or district court 
of the United States.
 (b) Exhaustion of Remedies.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), in an 
 action under subsection (a) the court may not exercise 
 jurisdiction until the aggrieved person has exhausted any 
 administrative remedies that may be provided by law.
 (2) No exhaustion required.--In an action under subsection 
 (a), the court shall exercise jurisdiction without regard to 
 whether the aggrieved person has exhausted any administrative 
 or other remedies that may be provided by law if the action 
 relates to--
 (A) whether the person is an eligible individual 
 within the meaning of section 1001(c);
 (B) whether the person is eligible for a premium 
 discount under subpart A of part 1 of subtitle B of 
 title VI;
 (C) whether the person is eligible for a reduction 
 in cost sharing under subpart D of part 3 of subtitle D 
 of title I; or
 (D) enrollment or disenrollment in a health plan.
 (c) Relief.--In an action under subsection (a), if the court finds 
that a failure described in such subsection has occurred, the court may 
award any appropriate relief.
 (d) Attorney's Fees.--In any action under subsection (a), the 
court, in its discretion, may allow the prevailing party, other than 
the United States, a reasonable attorney's fee (including expert fees) 
as part of the costs, and the United States shall be liable for costs 
the same as a private person.

SEC. 5237A. ENFORCEMENT OF CONSUMER PROTECTIONS.

 (a) Covered Violations.--The provisions of this section shall apply 
with respect to a health plan that fails to fulfill a duty imposed on 
the plan under section 1204 and subtitle A of this title.
 (b) Administrative Enforcement and Civil Penalties.--The penalties 
described in section 1867(d)(1) of the Social Security Act and the 
procedures described in section 1128A of such Act (other than the first 
two sentences of subsection (a) and subsection (b)) shall apply to 
health plans described in subsection (a). In addition to such 
penalties, an amount not to exceed $1,000,000 may be assessed in the 
case of a finding of a pattern or practice of such violations. The 
Secretary shall establish procedures whereby, when a consumer has 
disenrolled from a health plan violating the duties described in 
subsection (a), successor health plans may recover from the original 
health plan for health care costs attributable to such violations.
 (c) Correction of Substantial Violations.--Upon an administrative 
or judicial finding of a substantial violation of the duties described 
in subsection (a), the State or court may--
 (1) inform all current enrollees of the plan of the 
 violation and that they may disenroll immediately from that 
 plan and enroll with another community-rated health plan; and
 (2) notify the health plan that it shall immediately cease 
 enrollment activities until it has obtained certifications from 
 the appropriate certifying entity or court that the violation 
 has been corrected.
Such actions shall not be taken without providing the health plan with 
a reasonable opportunity to correct such violations, except where 
providing such an opportunity would risk health or safety.

SEC. 5238. DISCRIMINATION CLAIMS.

 (a) Civil Action by Aggrieved Person.--
 (1) In general.--Any person who is aggrieved by a 
 violation of section 1914 may commence a civil action against 
 the party or parties committing such violation in an 
 appropriate State court or district court of the United States.
 (2) Standards.--The standards used to determine whether a 
 violation has occurred in a complaint alleging discrimination 
 on the basis of age or disability under section 1914 shall be 
 the standards applied under the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 
 (42 U.S.C. 6101 et seq.) and the Americans with Disabilities 
 Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. 12101 et. seq.).
 (3) Relief.--In any action under paragraph (1), if the 
 court finds a violation of section 1914, the court may award 
 such equitable and injunctive relief as it deems appropriate, 
 and may award to the aggrieved person any sums lost as a result 
 of the violation. If the court finds that the party or parties 
 committing a violation engaged in intentional discrimination in 
 violation of section 1914, the aggrieved person may recover 
 compensatory damages. If the court finds that the party or 
 parties committing such violation did so with malice or 
 reckless indifference to the federally protected rights of the 
 aggrieved person, the aggrieved person may recover punitive 
 damages under this section against a defendant other than a 
 government, government agency or political subdivision.
 (4) Attorneys' fees.--In any action under paragraph (1), 
 the court, in its discretion, may allow the prevailing party, 
 other than the United States, a reasonable attorney's fee 
 (including expert fees and other litigation expenses) as part 
 of the costs, and the United States shall be liable for costs 
 the same as a private person.
 (b) Action by Secretary.--Whenever the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services finds that a party has failed to comply with section 
1914 or with an applicable regulation issued under such section, the 
Secretary shall notify the party. If within a reasonable period of time 
the party fails or refuses to comply, the Secretary may--
 (1) refer the matter to the Attorney General with a 
 recommendation that an appropriate civil action be instituted;
 (2) terminate or limit the participation of such party in 
 the programs authorized by this Act;
 (3) withhold Federal financial assistance to the party; or
 (4) take such other action as may be provided by law.
 (c) Action by Attorney General.--When a matter is referred to the 
Attorney General under subsection (b)(1), the Attorney General may 
bring a civil action in a district court of the United States for such 
relief as may be appropriate, including injunctive relief. In a civil 
action under this section, the court--
 (1) may grant any equitable relief that the court considers 
 to be appropriate;
 (2) may award such other relief as the court considers to 
 be appropriate, including in cases of intentional 
 discrimination compensatory and punitive damages; and
 (3) may, to vindicate the public interest when requested by 
 the Attorney General, assess a civil money penalty against the 
 party in an amount--
 (A) not exceeding $50,000 for a first violation; 
 and
 (B) not exceeding $100,000 for any subsequent 
 violation.

SEC. 5239. NONDISCRIMINATION IN FEDERALLY ASSISTED PROGRAMS.

 Federal payments under subtitle C of title VI shall be treated as 
Federal financial assistance for purposes of section 504 of the 
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. 794), section 303 of the Age 
Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6102), and section 601 of the 
Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d).

SEC. 5240. CIVIL AND ADMINISTRATION ACTION BY ESSENTIAL COMMUNITY 
 PROVIDER.

 (a) In General.--An electing essential community provider (as 
defined in section 1431(d)) who is aggrieved by the failure of a health 
plan to fulfill a duty imposed on the plan by section 1431 may commence 
a civil action against the plan in an appropriate State court or 
district court of the United States.
 (b) Relief.--In an action under subsection (a), if the court finds 
that the health plan has failed to fulfill a duty imposed on the plan 
by section 1431, the electing essential community provider may recover 
compensatory damages and the court may order any other appropriate 
relief.
 (c) Attorney's Fees.--In any action under subsection (a), the 
court, in its discretion, may allow the prevailing party, other than 
the United States, a reasonable attorney's fee (including expert fees) 
as part of the costs, and the United States shall be liable for costs 
the same as a private person.
 (d) State Complaint System Required.--Prior to commencing an action 
under subsection (a), the aggrieved essential community provider may 
first elect to utilize the administrative process provided under this 
subsection as follows:
 (1) The Secretary shall prescribe regulations governing 
 administrative grievance actions by essential community 
 providers that shall be consistent with the requirements of 
 section 5204 and that shall provide for the consolidation of 
 complaints (at the election of the essential community 
 providers) in cases involving multiple complaints against a 
 single health plan.
 (2) A State shall make available to each electing essential 
 community provider that is aggrieved by an action of a health 
 plan under section 1431, the opportunity to file a complaint in 
 the complaint review office established under section 5202. In 
 the case of essential community providers located in a 
 cooperative established in any State by the Secretary, the 
 Secretary shall assume all of the duties and obligations of 
 such State under this section.

SEC. 5241. FACIAL CONSTITUTIONAL CHALLENGES.

 (a) Jurisdiction.--The United States District Court for the 
District of Columbia shall have original and exclusive jurisdiction of 
any civil action brought to invalidate this Act or a provision of this 
Act on the ground of its being repugnant to the Constitution of the 
United States on its face and for every purpose. In any action 
described in this subsection, the district court may not grant any 
temporary order or preliminary injunction restraining the enforcement, 
operation, or execution of this Act or any provision of this Act.
 (b) Convening of Three-Judge Court.--An action described in 
subsection (a) shall be heard and determined by a district court of 
three judges in accordance with section 2284 of title 28, United States 
Code.
 (c) Consolidation.--When actions described in subsection (a) 
involving a common question of law or fact are pending before a 
district court, the court shall order all the actions consolidated.
 (d) Direct Appeal to Supreme Court.--In any action described in 
subsection (a), an appeal may be taken directly to the Supreme Court of 
the United States from any final judgment, decree, or order in which 
the district court--
 (1) holds this Act or any provision of this Act invalid; 
 and
 (2) makes a determination that its holding will materially 
 undermine the application of the Act as whole.
 (e) Construction.--This section does not limit--
 (1) the right of any person--
 (A) to a litigation concerning the Act or any 
 portion of the Act; or
 (B) to petition the Supreme Court for review of any 
 holding of a district court by writ of certiorari at 
 any time before the rendition of judgment in a court of 
 appeals; or
 (2) the authority of the Supreme Court to grant a writ of 
 certiorari for the review described in paragraph (1)(B).

SEC. 5242. TREATMENT OF PLANS AS PARTIES IN CIVIL ACTIONS.

 (a) In General.--A health plan may sue or be sued under this Act as 
an entity. Service of summons, subpoena, or other legal process of a 
court or hearing officer upon a trustee or an administrator of any such 
plan in his capacity as such shall constitute service upon the plan. In 
a case where a plan has not designated in applicable plan documents an 
individual as agent for the service of legal process, service upon the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services (in the case of a community-
rated health plan) or the Secretary of Labor (in the case of an 
experienced-rated health plan) shall constitute such service. The 
Secretary, not later than 15 days after receipt of service under the 
preceding sentence, shall notify the administrator or any trustee of 
the plan of receipt of such service.
 (b) Other Parties.--Any money judgment under this Act against a 
plan referred to in subsection (a) shall be enforceable only against 
the plan as an entity and shall not be enforceable against any other 
person unless liability against such person is established in his 
individual capacity under this Act.

SEC. 5243. WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTIONS.

 (a) In General.--A health care entity (as defined in section 
11101(7)) or a health plan may not discharge, discriminate or otherwise 
take adverse action against any employee with respect to compensation, 
terms, conditions or privileges of employment because the employee (or 
any person acting pursuant to the request of the employee) provided 
information to any Federal, State or private supervisory agency or 
entity regarding a possible violation of any provision of this Act or 
any regulation issued under this Act.
 (b) Civil Action.--An employee or former employee who believes that 
such employee has been discharged, discriminated or otherwise subject 
to adverse action in violation of subsection (a) may file a civil 
action in the appropriate United States district court within 2 years 
of the date of such discharge, discrimination or adverse action.
 (c) Determination of Court.--If a court in an action under 
subsection (b) determines that a violation of subsection (a) has 
occurred, the court may order the health care entity or plan that 
committed the violation--
 (1) to reinstate the employee to his or her former 
 position;
 (2) to pay compensatory damages to the employee;
 (3) to pay reasonable costs and attorneys fees incurred by 
 the employee in bringing such action; and
 (4) to take such other appropriate actions to remedy any 
 past discrimination.

SEC. 5244. GENERAL NONPREEMPTION OF RIGHTS AND REMEDIES.

 Nothing in this title shall be construed to deny, impair, or 
otherwise adversely affect a right or remedy available under law to any 
person, except to the extent the right or remedy is inconsistent with 
this title.

 Subtitle D--Medical Malpractice

 PART 1--LIABILITY REFORM

SEC. 5301. FEDERAL TORT REFORM.

 (a) Applicability.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in section 5302, this 
 part shall apply with respect to any medical malpractice 
 liability action brought in any State or Federal court, except 
 that this part shall not apply to a claim or action for damages 
 arising from a vaccine-related injury or death to the extent 
 that title XXI of the Public Health Service Act applies to the 
 claim or action.
 (2) Effect on sovereign immunity and choice of law or 
 venue.--Nothing in this part shall be construed to--
 (A) waive or affect any defense of sovereign 
 immunity asserted by any State under any provision of 
 law;
 (B) waive or affect any defense of sovereign 
 immunity asserted by the United States;
 (C) affect the applicability of any provision of 
 the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976;
 (D) preempt State choice-of-law rules with respect 
 to claims brought by a foreign nation or a citizen of a 
 foreign nation; or
 (E) affect the right of any court to transfer venue 
 or to apply the law of a foreign nation or to dismiss a 
 claim of a foreign nation or of a citizen of a foreign 
 nation on the ground of inconvenient forum.
 (3) Federal court jurisdiction not established on federal 
 question grounds.--Nothing in this part shall be construed to 
 establish any jurisdiction in the district courts of the United 
 States over medical malpractice liability actions on the basis 
 of section 1331 or 1337 of title 28, United States Code.
 (b) Definitions.--In this subtitle, the following definitions 
apply:
 (1) Alternative dispute resolution system; ADR.--The term 
 ``alternative dispute resolution system'' or ``ADR'' means a 
 system that provides for the resolution of medical malpractice 
 claims in a manner other than through medical malpractice 
 liability actions.
 (2) Claimant.--The term ``claimant'' means any person who 
 alleges a medical malpractice claim, and any person on whose 
 behalf such a claim is alleged, including the decedent in the 
 case of an action brought through or on behalf of an estate.
 (3) Health care professional.--The term ``health care 
 professional'' means any individual who provides health care 
 services in a State and who is required by the laws or 
 regulations of the State to be licensed or certified by the 
 State to provide such services in the State.
 (4) Health care provider.--The term ``health care 
 provider'' means any organization or institution that is 
 engaged in the delivery of health care services in a State and 
 that is required by the laws or regulations of the State to be 
 licensed or certified by the State to engage in the delivery of 
 such services in the State.
 (5) Injury.--The term ``injury'' means any illness, 
 disease, or other harm that is the subject of a medical 
 malpractice liability action or a medical malpractice claim.
 (6) Medical malpractice liability action.--The term 
 ``medical malpractice liability action'' means a cause of 
 action brought in a State or Federal court against a health 
 care provider or health care professional by which the 
 plaintiff alleges a medical malpractice claim.
 (7) Medical malpractice claim.--The term ``medical 
 malpractice claim'' means a claim brought against a health care 
 provider or health care professional in which a claimant 
 alleges that injury was caused by the provision of (or the 
 failure to provide) health care services, except that such term 
 does not include--
 (A) any claim based on an allegation of an 
 intentional tort;
 (B) any claim based on an allegation that a product 
 is defective that is brought against any individual or 
 entity that is not a health care professional or health 
 care provider; or
 (C) any claim brought pursuant to subtitle C of 
 this title.

SEC. 5302. STATE-BASED ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION MECHANISMS.

 (a) Application to Malpractice Claims Under Plans.--Prior to or 
immediately following the commencement of any medical malpractice 
action, the parties shall participate in the alternative dispute 
resolution system administered by the State under subsection (b). Such 
participation shall be in lieu of any other provision of Federal or 
State law or any contractual agreement made by or on behalf of the 
parties prior to the commencement of the medical malpractice action.
 (b) Adoption of Mechanism by State.--Each State shall--
 (1) maintain or adopt at least one of the alternative 
 dispute resolution methods satisfying the requirements 
 specified under subsection (c) and (d) for the resolution of 
 medical malpractice claims arising from the provision of (or 
 failure to provide) health care services to individuals 
 enrolled in a health plan; and
 (2) clearly disclose to enrollees (and potential enrollees) 
 the availability and procedures for consumer grievances, 
 including a description of the alternative dispute resolution 
 method or methods adopted under this subsection.
 (c) Specification of Permissible Alternative Dispute Resolution 
Methods.--
 (1) In general.--The Board shall, by regulation, develop 
 alternative dispute resolution methods for the use by States in 
 resolving medical malpractice claims under subsection (a). Such 
 methods shall include at least the following:
 (A) Arbitration.--The use of arbitration, a nonjury 
 adversarial dispute resolution process which may, 
 subject to subsection (d), result in a final decision 
 as to facts, law, liability or damages.
 (B) Claimant-requested binding arbitration.--For 
 claims involving a sum of money that falls below a 
 threshold amount set by the Board, the use of 
 arbitration not subject to subsection (d). Such binding 
 arbitration shall be at the sole discretion of the 
 claimant.
 (C) Mediation.--The use of mediation, a settlement 
 process coordinated by a neutral third party without 
 the ultimate rendering of a formal opinion as to 
 factual or legal findings.
 (D) Early neutral evaluation.--The use of early 
 neutral evaluation, in which the parties make a 
 presentation to a neutral attorney or other neutral 
 evaluator for an assessment of the merits, to encourage 
 settlement. If the parties do not settle as a result of 
 assessment and proceed to trial, the neutral 
 evaluator's opinion shall be kept confidential.
 (E) Certificate of merit.--The requirement that a 
 medical malpractice plaintiff submit to the court 
 before trial a written report by a qualified specialist 
 that includes the specialist's determination that, 
 after a review of the available medical record and 
 other relevant material, there is a reasonable and 
 meritorious cause for the filing of the action against 
 the defendant.
 (2) Standards for establishing methods.--In developing 
 alternative dispute resolution methods under paragraph (1), the 
 Board shall assure that the methods promote the resolution of 
 medical malpractice claims in a manner that--
 (A) is affordable for the parties involved;
 (B) provides for timely resolution of claims;
 (C) provides for the consistent and fair resolution 
 of claims; and
 (D) provides for reasonably convenient access to 
 dispute resolution for individuals enrolled in plans.
 (3) Waiver authority.--Upon application of a State, the 
 Board may grant the State the authority to fulfill the 
 requirement of subsection (b) by adopting a mechanism other 
 than a mechanism established by the Board pursuant to this 
 subsection, except that such mechanism must meet the standards 
 set forth in paragraph (2).
 (d) Further Redress.--Except with respect to the claimant-requested 
binding arbitration method set forth in subsection (c)(1)(B), and 
notwithstanding any other provision of a law or contractual agreement, 
a plan enrollee dissatisfied with the determination reached as a result 
of an alternative dispute resolution method applied under this section 
may, after the final resolution of the enrollee's claim under the 
method, bring a cause of action to seek damages or other redress with 
respect to the claim to the extent otherwise permitted under State law. 
The results of any alternative dispute resolution procedure are 
inadmissible at any subsequent trial, as are all statements, offers, 
and other communications made during such procedures, unless otherwise 
admissible under State law.

SEC. 5303. LIMITATION ON AMOUNT OF ATTORNEY'S CONTINGENCY FEES.

 (a) In General.--An attorney who represents, on a contingency fee 
basis, a plaintiff in a medical malpractice liability action may not 
charge, demand, receive, or collect for services rendered in connection 
with such action (including the resolution of the claim that is the 
subject of the action under any alternative dispute resolution system) 
in excess of--
 (1) 33\1/3\ percent of the first $150,000 of the total 
 amount recovered by judgment or settlement in such action; plus
 (2) 25 percent of any amount recovered above the amount 
 described in paragraph (1);
unless otherwise determined under State law. Such amount shall be 
computed after deductions are made for all the expenses associated with 
the claim other than those attributable to the normal operating 
expenses of the attorney.
 (b) Calculation of Periodic Payments.--In the event that a judgment 
or settlement includes periodic or future payments of damages, the 
amount recovered for purposes of computing the limitation on the 
contingency fee under subsection (a) may, in the discretion of the 
court, be based on the cost of the annuity or trust established to make 
the payments. In any case in which an annuity or trust is not 
established to make such payments, such amount shall be based on the 
present value of the payments.
 (c) Contingency Fee Defined.--As used in this section, the term 
``contingency fee'' means any fee for professional legal services which 
is, in whole or in part, contingent upon the recovery of any amount of 
damages, whether through judgment or settlement.

SEC. 5304. REDUCTION OF AWARDS FOR RECOVERY FROM COLLATERAL SOURCES.

 (a) Reduction of Award.--The total amount of damages recovered by a 
plaintiff in a medical malpractice liability action shall be reduced by 
an amount that equals--
 (1) the amount of any payment which the plaintiff has 
 received or to which the plaintiff is presently entitled on 
 account of the same injury for which the damages are awarded, 
 including payment under--
 (A) Federal or State disability or sickness 
 programs;
 (B) Federal, State, or private health insurance 
 programs;
 (C) private disability insurance programs;
 (D) employer wage continuation programs; and
 (E) any other program, if the payment is intended 
 to compensate the plaintiff for the same injury for 
 which damages are awarded; less
 (2) the amount of any premiums or any other payments that 
 the plaintiff has paid to be eligible to receive the payment 
 described in paragraph (1) and any portion of the award subject 
 to a subrogation lien or claim.
 (b) Subrogation.--The court may reduce a subrogation lien or claim 
described in subsection (a)(2) by an amount representing reasonable 
costs incurred in securing the award subject to the lien or claim.
 (c) Inapplicability of Section.--This section shall not apply to 
any case in which the court determines that the reduction of damages 
pursuant to subsection (a) would compound the effect of any State law 
limitation on damages so as to render the plaintiff less than fully 
compensated for his or her injuries.

SEC. 5305. PERIODIC PAYMENT OF AWARDS.

 (a) In General.--A party to a medical malpractice liability action 
may petition the court to instruct the trier of fact to award any 
future damages on an appropriate periodic basis. If the court, in its 
discretion, so instructs the trier of fact, and damages are awarded on 
a periodic basis, the court may require the defendant to purchase an 
annuity or other security instrument (typically based on future damages 
discounted to present value) adequate to assure payments of future 
damages.
 (b) Failure or Inability To Pay.--With respect to an award of 
damages described in subsection (a), if a defendant fails to make 
payments in a timely fashion, or if the defendant becomes or is at risk 
of becoming insolvent, upon such a showing the claimant may petition 
the court for an order requiring that remaining balance be discounted 
to present value and paid to the claimant in a lump-sum.
 (c) Modification of Payment Schedule.--The court shall retain 
authority to modify the payment schedule based on changed 
circumstances.
 (d) Future Damages Defined.--As used in this section, the term 
``future damages'' means any economic or noneconomic loss other than 
that incurred or accrued as of the time of judgment.

SEC. 5306. CONSTRUCTION.

 Nothing in this subtitle shall be construed to preempt any State 
law that sets a maximum limit on total damages.

 PART 2--OTHER PROVISIONS RELATING TO MEDICAL MALPRACTICE LIABILITY

SEC. 5311. STATE MALPRACTICE REFORM DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS.

 (a) Establishment.--The Secretary shall award grants to States for 
the establishment of malpractice reform demonstration projects in 
accordance with this section. Each such project shall be designed to 
assess the fairness and effectiveness of one or more of the following 
models:
 (1) No-fault liability.
 (2) Enterprise liability.
 (3) Practice guidelines.
 (b) Definitions.--For purposes of this section:
 (1) Medical adverse event.--The term ``medical adverse 
 event'' means an injury that is the result of medical 
 management as opposed to a disease process that creates 
 disability lasting at least one month after discharge, or that 
 prolongs a hospitalization for more than one month, and for 
 which compensation is available under a no-fault medical 
 liability system established under this section.
 (2) No-fault medical liability system.--The terms ``no-
 fault medical liability system'' and ``system'' mean a system 
 established by a State receiving a grant under this section 
 which replaces the common law tort liability system for medical 
 injuries with respect to certain qualified health care 
 organizations and qualified insurers and which meets the 
 requirements of this section.
 (3) Provider.--The term ``provider'' means physician, 
 physician assistant, or other individual furnishing health care 
 services in affiliation with a qualified health care 
 organization.
 (4) Qualified health care organization.--The term 
 ``qualified health care organization'' means a hospital, a 
 hospital system, a managed care network, or other entity 
 determined appropriate by the Secretary which elects in a State 
 receiving a grant under this section to participate in a no-
 fault medical liability system and which meets the requirements 
 of this section.
 (5) Qualified insurer.--The term ``qualified insurer'' 
 means a health care malpractice insurer, including a self-
 insured qualified health care organization, which elects in a 
 State receiving a grant under this section to participate in a 
 no-fault medical liability system and which meets the 
 requirements of this section.
 (6) Enterprise liability.--The term ``enterprise 
 liability'' means a system in which State law imposes 
 malpractice liability on the health plan in which a physician 
 participates in place of personal liability on the physician in 
 order to achieve improved quality of care, reductions in 
 defensive medical practices, and better risk management.
 (7) Practice guidelines.--The term ``practice guidelines'' 
 means guidelines established by the Agency for Health Care 
 Policy and Research pursuant to the Public Health Service Act 
 or this Act.
 (c) Applications by States.--
 (1) In general.--Each State desiring to establish a 
 malpractice reform demonstration project shall submit an 
 application to the Secretary at such time and in such manner as 
 the Secretary shall require.
 (2) Contents of application.--An application under 
 paragraph (1) shall include--
 (A) an identification of the State agency or 
 agencies that will administer the demonstration project 
 and be the grant recipient of funds for the State;
 (B) a description of the manner in which funds 
 granted to a State will be expended and a description 
 of fiscal control, accounting, and audit procedures to 
 ensure the proper dispersal of and accounting for funds 
 received under this section; and
 (C) such other information as the Secretary 
 determines appropriate.
 (3) Consideration of applications.--In reviewing all 
 applications received from States desiring to establish 
 malpractice demonstration projects under paragraph (1), the 
 Secretary shall consider--
 (A) data regarding medical malpractice and 
 malpractice litigation patterns in each State;
 (B) the contributions that any demonstration 
 project will make toward reducing malpractice and costs 
 associated with health care injuries;
 (C) diversity among the populations serviced by the 
 systems;
 (D) geographic distribution; and
 (E) such other criteria as the Secretary determines 
 appropriate.
 (d) Evaluation and Reports.--
 (1) By the states.--Each State receiving a grant under this 
 section shall conduct on-going evaluations of the effectiveness 
 of any demonstration project established in such State and 
 shall submit an annual report to the Secretary concerning the 
 results of such evaluations at such times and in such manner as 
 the Secretary shall require.
 (2) By the secretary.--The Secretary shall submit an annual 
 report to Congress concerning the fairness and effectiveness of 
 the demonstration projects conducted under this section. Such 
 report shall analyze the reports received by the Secretary 
 under paragraph (1).
 (e) Funding.--
 (1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated 
 such sums as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this 
 section.
 (2) Limitations on expenditures.--
 (A) Administrative expenses.--Not more than 10 
 percent of the amount of each grant awarded to a State 
 under this section may be used for administrative 
 expenses.
 (B) Waiver of cost limitations.--The limitation 
 under subparagraph (A) may be waived as determined 
 appropriate by the Secretary.
 (f) Eligibility for No-Fault Demonstration.--A State is eligible to 
receive a no-fault liability demonstration grant if the application of 
the State under subsection (c) includes--
 (1) an identification of each qualified health care 
 organization selected by the State to participate in the 
 system, including--
 (A) the location of each organization;
 (B) the number of patients generally served by each 
 organization;
 (C) the types of patients generally served by each 
 organization;
 (D) an analysis of any characteristics of each 
 organization which makes such organization appropriate 
 for participation in the system;
 (E) whether the organization is self-insured for 
 malpractice liability; and
 (F) such other information as the Secretary 
 determines appropriate;
 (2) an identification of each qualified insurer selected by 
 the State to participate in the system, including--
 (A) a schedule of the malpractice insurance 
 premiums generally charged by each insurer under the 
 common law tort liability system; and
 (B) such other information as the Secretary 
 determines appropriate;
 (3) a description of the procedure under which qualified 
 health care organizations and insurers elect to participate in 
 the system;
 (4) a description of the system established by the State to 
 assure compliance with the requirements of this section by each 
 qualified health care organization and insurer; and
 (5) a description of procedures for the preparation and 
 submission to the State of an annual report by each qualified 
 health care organization and qualified insurer participating in 
 a system that shall include--
 (A) a description of activities conducted under the 
 system during the year; and
 (B) the extent to which the system exceeded or 
 failed to meet relevant performance standards including 
 compensation for and deterrence of medical adverse 
 events.
 (g) Eligibility for Enterprise Liability Demonstration.--A State is 
eligible to receive an enterprise liability demonstration grant if the 
State--
 (1) has entered into an agreement with a health plan (other 
 than a fee-for-service plan) operating in the State under which 
 the plan assumes legal liability with respect to any medical 
 malpractice claim arising from the provision of (or failure to 
 provide) services under the plan by any physician participating 
 in the plan; and
 (2) has provided that, under the law of the State, a 
 physician participating in a plan that has entered into an 
 agreement with the State under paragraph (1) may not be liable 
 in damages or otherwise for such a claim and the plan may not 
 require such physician to indemnify the plan for any such 
 liability.
 (h) Eligibility for Practice Guidelines Demonstration.--A State is 
eligible to receive a practice guidelines demonstration grant if the 
law of the State provides that in the resolution of any medical 
malpractice action, compliance or non-compliance with an appropriate 
practice guideline shall be admissible at trial as a rebuttable 
presumption regarding medical negligence.

 Subtitle E--Expanded Efforts To Combat Health Care Fraud and Abuse

 PART 1--IMPROVED ENFORCEMENT

SEC. 5401. ALL-PAYER HEALTH CARE FRAUD AND ABUSE CONTROL PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--Not later than January 1, 1995, the Secretary and 
the Attorney General of the United States shall establish a joint 
program--
 (1) to coordinate Federal, State, and local law enforcement 
 programs to control fraud and abuse with respect to the 
 delivery of and payment for health care in the United States,
 (2) to conduct investigations (including consumer complaint 
 investigations), audits, evaluations, and inspections relating 
 to the delivery of and payment for health care in the United 
 States, and
 (3) to facilitate the enforcement of this subtitle and 
 other statutes applicable to health care fraud and abuse.
 (b) Coordination With Law Enforcement Agencies.--In carrying out 
the program under subsection (a), the Secretary and the Attorney 
General shall consult with, and arrange for the sharing of data and 
resources with Federal, State and local law enforcement agencies, State 
Medicaid Fraud Control Units, and State agencies responsible for the 
licensing and certification of health care providers.
 (c) Coordination With Consumer Purchasing Cooperatives and Health 
Plans.--In carrying out the program under subsection (a), the Secretary 
and the Attorney General shall consult with, and arrange for the 
sharing of data with representatives of consumer purchasing 
cooperatives and health plans.
 (d) Authorities of Attorney General and Secretary.--In carrying out 
duties under subsection (a), the Attorney General and the Secretary are 
authorized--
 (1) to conduct, supervise, and coordinate audits, civil and 
 criminal investigations, inspections, and evaluations relating 
 to the program established under such subsection;
 (2) to have access (including on-line access as requested 
 and available) to all records available to consumer purchasing 
 cooperatives and health plans relating to the activities 
 described in paragraph (1) (subject to restrictions based on 
 the confidentiality of certain information under part 2 of 
 subtitle B); and
 (3) to require the issuance of advisory opinions, fraud 
 alerts, and other appropriate educational material to assist in 
 compliance with the provisions of this subtitle.
 (e) Qualified Immunity for Providing Information.--The provisions 
of section 1157(a) of the Social Security Act (relating to limitation 
on liability) shall apply to a person providing information or 
communications to the Secretary or the Attorney General in conjunction 
with their performance of duties under this section, in the same manner 
as such section applies to information provided to organizations with a 
contract under part B of title XI of such Act.
 (f) Use of Powers Under Inspector General Act of 1978.--In carrying 
out duties and responsibilities under the program established under 
subsection (a), the Inspector General is authorized to exercise all 
powers granted under the Inspector General Act of 1978 to the same 
manner and extent as provided in that Act.
 (g) Definitions.--In this subtitle:
 (1) Health care.--The term ``health care'' includes long-
 term care benefits under title II of this Act.
 (2) Inspector general.--The term ``Inspector General'' 
 means the Inspector General of the Department of Health and 
 Human Services.

SEC. 5402. ESTABLISHMENT OF ALL-PAYER HEALTH CARE FRAUD AND ABUSE 
 CONTROL ACCOUNT.

 (a) Establishment.--
 (1) In general.--There is hereby established an account to 
 be known as the ``All-Payer Health Care Fraud and Abuse Control 
 Account'' (in this section referred to as the ``Anti-Fraud 
 Account''). The Anti-Fraud Account shall consist of such gifts 
 and bequests as may be made as provided in paragraph (2) and 
 such amounts as may be deposited in such Anti-Fraud Account as 
 provided in section 5411(d)(2). It shall also include the 
 following:
 (A) All criminal fines imposed in cases involving a 
 Federal health care offense (as defined in subsection 
 (d)).
 (B) Penalties and damages imposed under the False 
 Claims Act (31 U.S.C. 3729 et seq.), in cases involving 
 claims related to the provision of health care items 
 and services (other than funds awarded to a relator or 
 for restitution).
 (C) Administrative penalties and assessments 
 imposed under section 5411 (except as otherwise 
 provided by law).
 (D) Amounts resulting from the forfeiture of 
 property by reason of a Federal health care offense.
 Any such funds received on or after the date of the enactment 
 of this Act shall be deposited in the Anti-Fraud Account.
 (2) Authorization to accept gifts.--The Anti-Fraud Account 
 is authorized to accept on behalf of the United States money 
 gifts and bequests made unconditionally to the Anti-Fraud 
 Account, for the benefit of the Anti-Fraud Account or any 
 activity financed through the Anti-Fraud Account.
 (b) Use of Funds.--
 (1) In general.--Amounts in the Anti-Fraud Account shall be 
 available without appropriation and until expended as 
 determined jointly by the Secretary and the Attorney General of 
 the United States in carrying out the All-Payer Health Care 
 Fraud and Abuse Control Program established under section 5401 
 (including the administration of the Program), and may be used 
 to cover costs incurred in operating the Program, including 
 costs of--
 (A) prosecuting health care matters (through 
 criminal, civil and administrative proceedings);
 (B) investigations (including equipment, salaries, 
 administratively uncontrollable work, travel, and 
 training of law enforcement personnel);
 (C) financial and performance audits of health care 
 programs and operations;
 (D) inspections and other evaluations;
 (E) rewards paid under section 5404; and
 (F) provider and consumer education (including the 
 provision of advisory opinions) regarding compliance 
 with the provisions of this subtitle.
 Twenty percent of the amounts available in the Anti-Fraud 
 Account for any fiscal year shall be used for costs described 
 in subparagraph (F).
 (2) Funds used to supplement agency appropriations.--It is 
 intended that disbursements made from the Anti-Fraud Account to 
 any Federal agency be used to increase and not supplant the 
 recipient agency's appropriated operating budget.
 (c) Annual Report.--The Secretary and the Attorney General shall 
submit jointly an annual report to Congress on the amount of revenue 
which is generated and disbursed by the Anti-Fraud Account in each 
fiscal year.
 (d) Federal Health Care Offense Defined.--For purposes of 
subsection (a)(1)(A) and section 5404(a), the term ``Federal health 
care offense'' means a violation of, or a criminal conspiracy to 
violate--
 (1) sections 226, 668, 1033, or 1347 of title 18, United 
 States Code;
 (2) section 1128B of the Social Security Act;
 (3) sections 287, 371, 664, 666, 1001, 1027, 1341, 1343, or 
 1954 of title 18, United States Code, if the violation or 
 conspiracy relates to health care fraud;
 (4) sections 501 or 511 of the Employee Retirement Income 
 Security Act of 1974, if the violation or conspiracy relates to 
 health care fraud; or
 (5) sections 301, 303(a)(2), or 303 (b) or (e) of the 
 Federal Food Drug and Cosmetic Act, if the violation or 
 conspiracy relates to health care fraud.

SEC. 5403. USE OF FUNDS BY INSPECTOR GENERAL.

 (a) Reimbursements for Investigations.--
 (1) In general.--The Inspector General is authorized to 
 receive and retain for current use reimbursement for the costs 
 of conducting investigations, when such restitution is ordered 
 by a court, voluntarily agreed to by the payer, or otherwise.
 (2) Crediting.--Funds received by the Inspector General as 
 reimbursement for costs of conducting investigations shall be 
 deposited to the credit of the appropriation from which 
 initially paid, or to appropriations for similar purposes 
 currently available at the time of deposit, and shall remain 
 available for obligation for 1 year from the date of their 
 deposit.
 (3) Exception for forfeitures.--This subsection does not 
 apply to investigative costs paid to the Inspector General from 
 the Department of Justice Asset Forfeiture Fund, which monies 
 shall be deposited and expended in accordance with subsection 
 (b).
 (b) HHS Office of Inspector General Asset Forfeiture Proceeds 
Fund.--
 (1) In general.--There is hereby established the ``HHS 
 Office of Inspector General Asset Forfeiture Proceeds Fund,'' 
 to be administered by the Inspector General, which shall be 
 available to the Inspector General without fiscal year 
 limitation for expenses relating to the investigation of 
 matters within the jurisdiction of the Inspector General.
 (2) Deposits.--There shall be deposited in the Fund all 
 proceeds from forfeitures that have been transferred to the 
 Inspector General from the Department of Justice Asset 
 Forfeiture Fund under section 524 of title 28, United States 
 Code.

SEC. 5404. REWARDS FOR INFORMATION LEADING TO PROSECUTION AND 
 CONVICTION.

 (a) In General.--In special circumstances, the Secretary and the 
Attorney General of the United States may jointly make a payment of up 
to $10,000 to a person who furnishes information unknown to the 
Government relating to a possible prosecution of a Federal health care 
offense (as defined in section 5402(d)).
 (b) Ineligible Persons.--A person is not eligible for a payment 
under subsection (a) if--
 (1) the person is a current or former officer or employee 
 of a Federal or State government agency or instrumentality who 
 furnishes information discovered or gathered in the course of 
 government employment;
 (2) the person knowingly participated in the offense;
 (3) the information furnished by the person consists of 
 allegations or transactions that have been disclosed to the 
 public--
 (A) in a criminal, civil, or administrative 
 proceeding;
 (B) in a congressional, administrative or General 
 Accounting Office report, hearing, audit, or 
 investigation; or
 (C) by the news media, unless the person is the 
 original source of the information; or
 (4) when, in the judgment of the Attorney General, it 
 appears that a person whose illegal activities are being 
 prosecuted or investigated could benefit from the award.
 (c) Definition.--For the purposes of subsection (b)(3)(C), the term 
``original source'' means a person who has direct and independent 
knowledge of the information that is furnished and has voluntarily 
provided the information to the Government prior to disclosure by the 
news media.
 (d) No Judicial Review.--Neither the failure of the Secretary and 
the Attorney General to authorize a payment under subsection (a) nor 
the amount authorized shall be subject to judicial review.

 PART 2--CIVIL PENALTIES AND RIGHTS OF ACTION

SEC. 5411. CIVIL MONETARY PENALTIES.

 (a) Actions Subject to Penalty.--Any person who is determined by 
the Secretary to have committed any action with respect to an 
applicable health plan that would subject the person to a penalty under 
paragraphs (1) through (3) of section 1128A(a) of the Social Security 
Act if the action was taken with respect to title V, XVIII, XIX, or XX 
of such Act, shall be subject to a penalty in accordance with 
subsection (b).
 (b) Penalties Described.--
 (1) General rule.--In the case of a person who the 
 Secretary determines has committed an action described in 
 subsection (a), the person shall be subject to the civil 
 monetary penalty (together with any additional assessment) to 
 which the person would be subject under section 1128A of the 
 Social Security Act if the action on which the determination is 
 based had been committed with respect to title V, XVIII, XIX, 
 or XX of such Act, by substituting ``$10,000'' for ``$2,000'', 
 and ``3 times the amount claimed'' for ``twice the amount 
 claimed''.
 (2) Interest on penalties.--Interest shall accrue on the 
 civil monetary penalties and assessments imposed by a final 
 determination of the Secretary under this subsection, in 
 accordance with an annual rate established by the Secretary 
 under the Federal Claims Collection Act. The rate of interest 
 charged shall be the rate in effect on the date the 
 determination becomes final and shall remain fixed at that rate 
 until the entire amount due is paid. In addition, the Secretary 
 is authorized to recover the costs of collection in any case 
 where such penalties and assessments are not paid within 30 
 days after the determination becomes final, or in the case of a 
 compromised amount, where payments are more than 90 days past 
 due. In lieu of actual costs, the Secretary is authorized to 
 impose a charge of up to 10 percent of the amount of such 
 penalties and assessments owed to cover the costs of 
 collection.
 (3) Determinations to exclude permitted.--In addition to 
 any civil monetary penalty or assessment imposed under this 
 subsection, the Secretary may make a determination in the same 
 proceeding to exclude a provider from participation in all 
 applicable health plans for the delivery of or payment for 
 health care items or services (in accordance with section 
 5414(c)).
 (c) Procedures for Imposition of Penalties.--
 (1) Applicability of procedures under social security 
 act.--Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (2), the 
 provisions of section 1128A of the Social Security Act (other 
 than subsections (a) and (b) and the second sentence of 
 subsection (f)) shall apply to the imposition of a civil 
 monetary penalty, assessment, or exclusion under this section 
 in the same manner as such provisions apply with respect to the 
 imposition of a penalty, assessment, or exclusion under section 
 1128A of such Act.
 (2) Authority of secretary of labor and states to impose 
 penalties, assessments, and exclusions.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary of Labor or a State 
 may initiate an action to impose a civil monetary 
 penalty, assessment, or exclusion under this section 
 with respect to actions relating to a large group 
 sponsor if authorized by the Attorney General of the 
 United States and the Secretary pursuant to regulations 
 promulgated by the Secretary in consultation with the 
 Attorney General.
 (B) Requirements described.--Under the regulations 
 promulgated under subparagraph (A), the Attorney 
 General and the Secretary shall review an action 
 proposed by the Secretary of Labor or a State, and not 
 later than 60 days after receiving notice of the 
 proposed action from the Secretary of Labor or the 
 State, shall--
 (i) approve the proposed action to be taken 
 by the Secretary of Labor or the State;
 (ii) disapprove the proposed action; or
 (iii) assume responsibility for initiating 
 a criminal, civil, or administrative action 
 based on the information provided in the 
 notice.
 (C) Action deemed approved if deadline missed.--If 
 the Attorney General and the Secretary fail to respond 
 to a proposed action by the Secretary of Labor or a 
 State within the period described in subparagraph (B), 
 the Attorney General and the Secretary shall be deemed 
 to have approved the proposed action to be taken by the 
 Secretary of Labor or the State.
 (d) Treatment of Amounts Recovered.--Any amounts recovered under 
this section shall be paid to the Secretary and disposed of as follows:
 (1) Such portions of the amounts recovered as is determined 
 to have been improperly paid from an applicable health plan for 
 the delivery of or payment for health care items or services 
 shall be repaid to such plan (and enrollees of such plan as 
 appropriate).
 (2) The remainder of the amounts recovered shall be 
 deposited in the All-Payer Health Care Fraud and Abuse Control 
 Account established under section 5402.
 (e) Notification of Licensing Authorities.--Whenever the 
Secretary's determination to impose a penalty, assessment, or exclusion 
under this section becomes final, the Secretary shall notify the 
appropriate State or local licensing agency or organization (including 
the agency specified in section 1864(a) and 1902(a)(33) of the Social 
Security Act) that such a penalty, assessment, or exclusion has become 
final and the reasons therefor.

SEC. 5412. PERMITTING PARTIES TO BRING ACTIONS ON OWN BEHALF.

 (a) In General.--Subject to subsections (b) and (c), a health plan 
or large group sponsor that suffers harm or monetary loss exceeding the 
sum or value of $10,000 (excluding interest) as a result of any 
activity of an individual or entity which makes the individual or 
entity subject to a civil monetary penalty under section 5411 may, in a 
civil action against the individual or entity in the United States 
District Court, obtain treble damages and costs including attorneys' 
fees against the individual or entity and such equitable relief as is 
appropriate.
 (b) Requirements for Bringing Action.--A person may bring a civil 
action under this section only if--
 (1) the person provides the Secretary with written notice 
 of--
 (A) the person's intent to bring an action under 
 this section,
 (B) the identities of the individuals or entities 
 the person intends to name as defendants to the action, 
 and
 (C) all information the person possesses regarding 
 the activity that is the subject of the action that may 
 materially affect the Secretary's decision to initiate 
 a proceeding to impose a civil monetary penalty under 
 section 5411 against the defendants, and
 (2) one of the following conditions is met:
 (A) During the 60-day period that begins on the 
 date the Secretary receives the written notice 
 described in paragraph (1), the Secretary does not 
 notify the person that the Secretary intends to 
 initiate an investigation to determine whether to 
 impose a civil monetary penalty under section 5411 
 against the defendants.
 (B) The Secretary notifies the person during the 
 60-day period described in subparagraph (A) that the 
 Secretary intends to initiate an investigation to 
 determine whether to impose a civil monetary penalty 
 under such section against the defendants, and the 
 Secretary subsequently notifies the person that the 
 Secretary no longer intends to initiate an 
 investigation or proceeding to impose a civil monetary 
 penalty against the defendants.
 (C) After the expiration of the 1-year period that 
 begins on the date written notice is provided to the 
 Secretary, the Secretary has not initiated a proceeding 
 to impose a civil monetary penalty against the 
 defendants.
 (c) Treatment of Excess Awards.--If a person is awarded any amounts 
in an action brought under this section that are in excess of the 
damages suffered by the person as a result of the defendant's 
activities, 20 percent of such amounts shall be withheld from the 
person for payment into the All-Payer Health Care Fraud and Abuse 
Control Account established under section 5402(a).
 (d) Statute of Limitations.--No action may be brought under this 
section more than 6 years after the date of the activity with respect 
to which the action is brought.
 (e) No Limitation on Other Actions.--Nothing in this section shall 
limit the right of any person to pursue any other right of action or 
remedy available under the law.
 (f) Pendent Jurisdiction.--Nothing in this section shall be 
construed, by reason of a claim arising under this section, to confer 
on the Courts of the United States jurisdiction over any State law 
claim.

SEC. 5413. EXCLUSION FROM PROGRAM PARTICIPATION.

 (a) Mandatory Exclusion.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the 
 Secretary shall exclude an individual or entity from 
 participation in any applicable health plan if the individual 
 or entity--
 (A) is excluded from participation in a public 
 program under, or is otherwise described in, section 
 1128(a) of the Social Security Act (relating to 
 individuals and entities convicted of health care-
 related crimes or patient abuse);
 (B) has been convicted after the date of the 
 enactment of this section, under Federal or State law, 
 in connection with the delivery of a health care item 
 or service of a criminal offense consisting of a felony 
 relating to fraud, theft, embezzlement, breach of 
 fiduciary responsibility, or other financial 
 misconduct; or
 (C) has been convicted after such date, under 
 Federal or State law, of a criminal offense consisting 
 of a felony relating to the unlawful manufacture, 
 distribution, prescription, or dispensing of a 
 controlled substance.
 (2) Waiver permitted.--
 (A) In general.--When, in the opinion of the 
 Secretary, mandatory exclusion of an individual or 
 entity would significantly harm the public health or 
 pose a significant risk to the public health, the 
 Secretary may waive such exclusion and shall apply such 
 other appropriate penalties as authorized under this 
 subtitle.
 (B) Application for waiver of exclusion.--
 (i) In general.--An individual or entity 
 subject to mandatory exclusion under this 
 subsection may apply to the Secretary, in a 
 manner specified by the Secretary in 
 regulations, for waiver of the exclusion.
 (ii) Secretarial response.--The Secretary 
 may waive the exclusion for the reasons 
 described in subparagraph (A).
 (C) Notification of termination.--The Secretary 
 shall promptly notify each sponsor of an applicable 
 health plan and each entity that administers a State 
 health care program described in section 1128(h) of the 
 Social Security Act of each termination of exclusion 
 made under this paragraph.
 (b) Permissive Exclusion.--The Secretary may exclude an individual 
or entity from participation in any applicable health plan if the 
individual or entity--
 (1) is excluded from participation in a public program 
 under, or is otherwise described in, section 1128(b) of the 
 Social Security Act (other than paragraphs (3), (6)(A), (6)(C), 
 (6)(D), (10), or (13) of such section);
 (2) has been convicted after the date of the enactment of 
 this section, under Federal or State law, in connection with 
 the delivery of a health care item or service of a criminal 
 offense consisting of a misdemeanor relating to fraud, theft, 
 embezzlement, breach of fiduciary responsibility, or other 
 financial misconduct; or
 (3) has been convicted after the date of the enactment of 
 this section, under Federal or State law, of a criminal offense 
 consisting of a misdemeanor relating to the unlawful 
 manufacture, distribution, prescription, or dispensing of a 
 controlled substance.
 (c) Notice, Effective Date, and Period of Exclusion.--
 (1) Notice of exclusion.--An exclusion under this section 
 or section 5411(b)(3) shall be effective at such time and upon 
 such reasonable notice to the public and to the individual or 
 entity excluded as may be specified in regulations consistent 
 with paragraph (2).
 (2) Effective date of exclusion.--Such an exclusion shall 
 be effective with respect to services furnished to an 
 individual on or after the effective date of the exclusion.
 (3) Period of exclusion.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary shall specify, in 
 the notice of exclusion under paragraph (1) and the 
 notice under section 5411(e), the minimum period (or, 
 in the case of an exclusion of an individual excluded 
 from participation in a public program under, or is 
 otherwise described in, section 1128(b)(12) of the 
 Social Security Act, the period) of the exclusion.
 (B) Minimum period for mandatory exclusions.--In 
 the case of a mandatory exclusion under subsection (a), 
 the minimum period of exclusion shall be not less than 
 2 years.
 (C) Minimum period for certain permissive 
 exclusions.--
 (i) Fraud, obstruction of investigation, 
 and controlled substance conviction.--In the 
 case of an exclusion of an individual excluded 
 from participation in a public program under, 
 or is otherwise described in, paragraph (1) or 
 (2) of section 1128(b) of the Social Security 
 Act or paragraph (2) or (3) of subsection (b) 
 of this section, the period of exclusion shall 
 be a minimum of 1 year, unless the Secretary 
 determines that a longer period is necessary 
 because of aggravating circumstances.
 (ii) Suspensions.--In the case of an 
 exclusion of an individual or entity excluded 
 from participation in a public program under, 
 or is otherwise described in, paragraph (4), 
 (5)(A), or (5)(B) of section 1128(b) of the 
 Social Security Act, the period of the 
 exclusion shall not be less than the period 
 during which the individual's or entity's 
 license to provide health care is revoked, 
 suspended or surrendered, or the individual or 
 the entity is excluded or suspended from a 
 Federal or State health care program.
 (iii) Unnecessary services.--In the case of 
 an exclusion of an individual or entity 
 described in paragraph (6)(B) of section 
 1128(b) of the Social Security Act, the period 
 of the exclusion shall be not less than 1 year.
 (iv) Denial of immediate access.--In the 
 case of an exclusion of an individual described 
 in paragraph (12) of section 1128(b) of the 
 Social Security Act, the period of the 
 exclusion shall be equal to the sum of--
 (I) the length of the period in 
 which the individual failed to grant 
 the immediate access described in that 
 paragraph, and
 (II) an additional period, not to 
 exceed 90 days, set by the Secretary.
 (d) Notice to Entities Administering Public Programs for the 
Delivery of or Payment for Health Care Items or Services.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary shall exercise the authority 
 under this section in a manner that results in an individual's 
 or entity's exclusion from all applicable health plans for the 
 delivery of or payment for health care items or services.
 (2) Notification requirements.--The Secretary shall 
 promptly notify each sponsor of an applicable health plan and 
 each entity that administers a State health care program 
 described in section 1128(h) of the Social Security Act of the 
 fact and circumstances of each exclusion (together with the 
 period thereof) effected against an individual or entity under 
 this section or under section 5411(b)(3).
 (e) Notice to State Licensing Agencies.--The provisions of section 
1128(e) of the Social Security Act shall apply to this section in the 
same manner as such provisions apply to sections 1128 and 1128A of such 
Act.
 (f) Notice, Hearing, and Judicial Review.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), any individual 
 or entity that is excluded (or directed to be excluded) from 
 participation under this section is entitled to reasonable 
 notice and opportunity for a hearing thereon by the Secretary 
 to the same extent as is provided in section 205(b) of the 
 Social Security Act, and to judicial review of the Secretary's 
 final decision after such hearing as is provided in section 
 205(g) of such Act, except that such action shall be brought in 
 the Court of Appeals of the United States for the judicial 
 circuit in which the individual or entity resides, or has a 
 principal place of business, or, if the individual or entity 
 does not reside or have a principal place of business within 
 any such judicial circuit, in the United States Court of 
 Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.
 (2) Administrative hearing.--Unless the Secretary 
 determines that the health or safety of individuals receiving 
 services warrants the exclusion taking effect earlier, any 
 individual or entity that is the subject of an adverse 
 determination based on paragraphs (6)(B), (7), (8), (9), (11), 
 (12), (14), or (15) of section 1128(b) of the Social Security 
 Act, shall be entitled to a hearing by an administrative law 
 judge (as provided under section 205(b) of the Social Security 
 Act) on the determination before any exclusion based upon the 
 determination takes effect. If a hearing is requested, the 
 exclusion shall be effective upon the issuance of an order by 
 the administrative law judge upholding the determination of the 
 Secretary to exclude.
 (3) Special rules.--The provisions of section 205(h) of the 
 Social Security Act shall apply with respect to this section or 
 section 5411(b)(3) to the same extent as such provisions apply 
 with respect to title II of such Act.
 (g) Application for Termination of Exclusion.--
 (1) In general.--An individual or entity excluded (or 
 directed to be excluded) from participation under this section 
 or section 5411(b)(3) may apply to the Secretary, in a manner 
 specified by the Secretary in regulations and at the end of the 
 minimum period of exclusion (or, in the case of an individual 
 or entity described in section 1128(b)(12), the period of 
 exclusion) provided under this section or section 5411(b)(3) 
 and at such other times as the Secretary may provide, for 
 termination of the exclusion.
 (2) Secretarial response.--The Secretary may terminate the 
 exclusion if the Secretary determines, on the basis of the 
 conduct of the applicant which occurred after the date of the 
 notice of exclusion or which was unknown to the Secretary at 
 the time of the exclusion, that--
 (A) there is no basis under this section or section 
 5411(b)(3) for a continuation of the exclusion, and
 (B) there are reasonable assurances that the types 
 of actions which formed the basis for the original 
 exclusion have not recurred and will not recur.
 (3) Notification of termination.--The Secretary shall 
 promptly notify each sponsor of an applicable health plan and 
 each entity that administers a State health care program 
 described in section 1128(h) of the Social Security Act of each 
 termination of exclusion made under this subsection.
 (h) Convicted Defined.--In this section, the term ``convicted'' has 
the meaning given such term in section 1128(i) of the Social Security 
Act.
 (i) Request for Exclusion.--The sponsor of any applicable health 
plan (including a State in the case of a consumer purchasing 
cooperative and the Secretary of Labor in the case of a large group 
sponsor) may request that the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
exclude an individual or entity with respect to actions under such a 
plan in accordance with this section.
 (j) Effect of Exclusion.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
this Act, no payment may be made under a health plan for the delivery 
of or payment for any item or service (other than an emergency item or 
service, not including items or services furnished in an emergency room 
of a hospital) furnished--
 (1) by an individual or entity during the period when such 
 individual or entity is excluded pursuant to this section or 
 section 5411(b)(3) from participation in a health plan; or
 (2) at the medical direction or on the prescription of a 
 physician during the period when the physician is excluded 
 pursuant to this section or section 5411(b)(3) from 
 participation in a health plan and the person furnishing the 
 item or service knew or had reason to know of the exclusion 
 (after a reasonable time period after reasonable notice has 
 been furnished to the person).

 PART 3--AMENDMENTS TO CRIMINAL LAW

SEC. 5421. HEALTH CARE FRAUD.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 63 of title 18, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 1347. Health care fraud
 ``(a) Whoever knowingly executes, or attempts to execute, a scheme 
or artifice--
 ``(1) to defraud any consumer purchasing cooperative, 
 health plan, or other person, in connection with the delivery 
 of or payment for health care benefits, items, or services; or
 ``(2) to obtain, by means of false or fraudulent pretenses, 
 representations, or promises, any of the money or property 
 owned by, or under the custody or control of, any consumer 
 purchasing cooperative, health plan, or person in connection 
 with the delivery of or payment for health care benefits, 
 items, or services;
shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 10 years, 
or both. If the violation results in serious bodily injury (as defined 
in section 1365 of this title) such person shall be imprisoned for life 
or any term of years.
 ``(b) As used in this section--
 ``(1) the terms `consumer purchasing cooperative' and 
 `health plan' have the meanings given those terms in title I of 
 the Health Security Act; and
 ``(2) the term `health care' includes long-term care under 
 title II of the Health Security Act.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
chapter 63 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the 
end the following:

``1347. Health care fraud.''.

SEC. 5422. THEFT OR EMBEZZLEMENT.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 31 of title 18, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 668. Theft or embezzlement in connection with health care
 ``(a) Whoever embezzles, steals, willfully and unlawfully converts 
to the use of any person other than the rightful owner, or 
intentionally misapplies any of the moneys, securities, premiums, 
credits, property, or other assets of a consumer purchasing 
cooperative, health plan, or of any fund connected with such a 
cooperative or plan, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not 
more than 10 years, or both.
 ``(b) As used in this section, the terms `consumer purchasing 
cooperative' and `health plan' have the meanings given those terms in 
title I of the Health Security Act.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
chapter 31 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the 
end the following:

``668. Theft or embezzlement in connection with health care.''.

SEC. 5423. FALSE STATEMENTS.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 47 of title 18, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 1033. False statements relating to health care matters
 ``(a) Whoever, in any matter involving a consumer purchasing 
cooperative or health plan, knowingly and willfully falsifies, 
conceals, or covers up by any trick, scheme, or device a material fact, 
or makes any false, fictitious, or fraudulent statements or 
representations, or makes or uses any false writing or document knowing 
the same to contain any false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement or 
entry, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 5 
years, or both.
 ``(b) As used in this section, the terms `consumer purchasing 
cooperative' and `health plan' have the meanings given those terms 
under title I of the Health Security Act.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of 
chapter 47 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the 
end the following:

``1033. False statements relating to health care matters.''.

SEC. 5424. BRIBERY AND GRAFT.

 (a) In General.--Chapter 11 of title 18, United States Code, is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
``Sec. 226. Bribery and graft in connection with health care
 ``(a) Whoever--
 ``(1) directly or indirectly, corruptly gives, offers, or 
 promises anything of value to a health care official, or offers 
 or promises a health care official to give anything of value to 
 any other person, with intent--
 ``(A) to influence any of the health care 
 official's actions, decisions, or duties relating to a 
 consumer purchasing cooperative or health plan;
 ``(B) to influence such an official to commit or 
 aid in the committing, or collude in or allow, any 
 fraud, or make opportunity for the commission of any 
 fraud, on a consumer purchasing cooperative or health 
 plan; or
 ``(C) to induce such an official to engage in any 
 conduct in violation of the lawful duty of such 
 official; or
 ``(2) being a health care official, directly or indirectly, 
 corruptly demands, seeks, receives, accepts, or agrees to 
 accept anything of value personally or for any other person or 
 entity, the giving of which violates paragraph (1) of this 
 subsection;
shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 15 years, 
or both.
 ``(b) Whoever, otherwise than as provided by law for the proper 
discharge of any duty, directly or indirectly gives, offers, or 
promises anything of value to a health care official, for or because of 
any of the health care official's actions, decisions, or duties 
relating to a consumer purchasing cooperative or health plan, shall be 
fined under this title or imprisoned not more than two years, or both.
 ``(c) As used in this section--
 ``(1) the term `health care official' means--
 ``(A) an administrator, officer, trustee, 
 fiduciary, custodian, counsel, agent, or employee of 
 any consumer purchasing cooperative or health plan;
 ``(B) an officer, counsel, agent, or employee, of 
 an organization that provides services under contract 
 to any consumer purchasing cooperative or health plan;
 ``(C) an official or employee of a State agency 
 having regulatory authority over any consumer 
 purchasing cooperative or health plan;
 ``(D) an officer, counsel, agent, or employee of a 
 health care sponsor;
 ``(2) the term `health care sponsor' means any individual 
 or entity serving as the sponsor of a consumer purchasing 
 cooperative or health plan for purposes of the Health Security 
 Act, and includes the joint board of trustees or other similar 
 body used by two or more employers to administer a consumer 
 purchasing cooperative or health plan for purposes of such Act; 
 and
 ``(3) the terms `consumer purchasing cooperative' and 
 `health plan' have the meanings given those terms under title I 
 of the Health Security Act.''.
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of chapters at the beginning of 
chapter 11 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the 
end the following:

``226. Bribery and graft in connection with health care.''.

SEC. 5425. INJUNCTIVE RELIEF RELATING TO HEALTH CARE OFFENSES.

 Section 1345(a)(1) of title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (A);
 (2) by inserting ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (B); and
 (3) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(C) committing or about to commit a Federal health care 
 offense (as defined in section 5402(d) of the Health Security 
 Act);''.

SEC. 5426. GRAND JURY DISCLOSURE.

 Section 3322 of title 18, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subsections (c) and (d) as subsections 
 (d) and (e), respectively; and
 (2) by inserting after subsection (b) the following:
 ``(c) A person who is privy to grand jury information concerning a 
health law violation--
 ``(1) received in the course of duty as an attorney for the 
 Government; or
 ``(2) disclosed under rule 6(e)(3)(A)(ii) of the Federal 
 Rules of Criminal Procedure;
may disclose that information to an attorney for the Government to use 
in any civil proceeding related to a Federal health care offense (as 
defined in section 5402(d) of the Health Security Act).''.

SEC. 5427. FORFEITURES FOR VIOLATIONS OF FRAUD STATUTES.

 Section 982(a) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by 
inserting after paragraph (5) the following:
 ``(6) The court, in imposing sentence on a person convicted of a 
Federal health care offense (as defined in section 5402(d) of the 
Health Security Act), shall order such person to forfeit to the United 
States any property, real or personal, constituting or traceable to the 
gross proceeds obtained, directly or indirectly, as a result of the 
commission of the offense.''.

 PART 4--AMENDMENTS TO CIVIL FALSE CLAIMS ACT

SEC. 5431. AMENDMENTS TO CIVIL FALSE CLAIMS ACT.

 Section 3729 of title 31, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(7), by inserting ``or to a health 
 plan'' after ``property to the Government'';
 (2) in the matter following subsection (a)(7), by inserting 
 ``or health plan'' before ``sustains because of the act of that 
 person,'';
 (3) at the end of the first sentence of subsection (a), by 
 inserting ``or health plan'' before ``sustains because of the 
 act of the person.'';
 (4) in subsection (c)--
 (A) by inserting ``the term'' after ``section,''; 
 and
 (B) by adding at the end the following: ``The term 
 also includes any request or demand, whether under 
 contract of otherwise, for money or property which is 
 made or presented to a health plan.''; and
 (5) by adding at the end the following:
 ``(f) Health Plan Defined.--For purposes of this section, the term 
`health plan' has the meaning given such term under section 1400 of the 
Health Security Act.''.

 PART 5--EFFECTIVE DATE

SEC. 5441. EFFECTIVE DATE.

 Except as otherwise provided in this subtitle, the provisions of, 
and amendments made by, this subtitle shall be effective on and after 
January 1, 1995.

 Subtitle F--Repeal of Exemption

SEC. 5501. REPEAL OF EXEMPTION FOR HEALTH INSURANCE.

 (a) In General.--Section 3 of the Act of March 9, 1945 (15 U.S.C. 
1013), known as the McCarran-Ferguson Act, is amended by adding at the 
end the following:
 ``(c) Notwithstanding that the business of insurance is regulated 
by State law, nothing in this Act shall limit the applicability of the 
following Acts to the business of insurance to the extent that such 
business relates to the provision of health benefits:
 ``(1) The Sherman Act (15 U.S.C. 1 et seq.).
 ``(2) The Clayton Act (15 U.S.C. 12 et seq.).
 ``(3) Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 41 et seq.).
 ``(4) The Act of June 19, 1936 (49 Stat. 1526; 15 U.S.C. 
 21a et seq.), known as the Robinson-Patman Antidiscrimination 
 Act.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
take effect on the first day of the sixth month beginning after the 
date of the enactment of this Act.

 TITLE VI--PREMIUM CAPS; PREMIUM-BASED FINANCING; AND PLAN PAYMENTS

 table of contents of title

 TITLE VI--PREMIUM CAPS; PREMIUM-BASED FINANCING; AND PLAN PAYMENTS

Sec. 6000. General definitions.
 Subtitle A--Premium Caps

 Parsubpart a--computation of targets and accepted bidseas
Sec. 6001. Computation of health care coverage area inflation factors.
Sec. 6002. Board determination of national per capita baseline premium 
 target.
Sec. 6003. Determination of area per capita premium targets.
Sec. 6004. Initial rate filing and bid negotiation process.
Sec. 6005. State financial incentives.
Sec. 6006. Recommendations to eliminate regional variations in area 
 targets due to variation in practice 
 patterns; congressional consideration.
Sec. 6007. Reference to limitation on administrative and judicial 
 review of certain determinations.
Sec. 6subpart b--plan and provider payment reductions to maintain 
 expenditures within targets
Sec. 6011. Plan payment reduction.
Sec. 6012. Provider payment reduction.
 Part 2--Health Expenditures of Large Group Purchasers

Sec. 6021. Calculation of premium equivalents.
Sec. 6022. Sanctions for large group purchaser for excess increase in 
 expenditures.
 Part 3--Treatment of Single-payer States

Sec. 6031. Special rules for single-payer States.
 Part 4--Transition Provisions

Sec. 6041. Monitoring prices and expenditures.
Sec. 6042. Health care utilization research program.
 Subtitle B--Premium-Related Financings

 Partsubpart a--family shareents
Sec. 6101. Family share of premium.
Sec. 6102. Amount of premium.
Sec. 6103. Family credit.
Sec. 6104. Premium discount based on income.
Sec. 6105. Excess premium credit.
Sec. 6106. Large group purchaser opt-in credit.
Sec. 6107. Family collection shortfall add-on.
Sec. 6108. No loss of coverage.
Sec. 61subpart b--repayment of family credit by certain families
Sec. 6110. Repayment of family credit by certain families.
Sec. 6111. No liability for families employed full-time; reduction in 
 liability for part-time employment.
Sec. 6112. Limitation of liability based on income.
Sec. 6113. Payments by nonqualifying employees.
Sec. 6114. Special treatment of certain retirees and qualified spouses 
 and children.
Sec. 6115. Special treatment of certain medicare beneficiaries.
 subpart a--small employers exempt from coverage obligations
Sec. 6116. Exemption from coverage obligations.
Sec. 6117. Small employer defined.
Sec. 6118. Election.
Sec. 6119. Treatment of small employers.
Sec. 6120. Nonelecsubpart b--community-rated employers
Sec. 6121. Employer premium payment required.
Sec. 6122. Computation of base employment monthly premium.
Sec. 6123. Premium discount for certain employers.
Sec. 6124. Payment adjustment for certain large employers.
Sec. 6125. Employer collection shortfall add-on.
Sec. 6126. Applicatsubpart c--large group purchasers
Sec. 6131. Large employer premium payment required.
Sec. 6132. Assistance for low-wage families.
Sec. 6133. Excess increase in premium equivalent.
Sec. 6134. Cost control.
Sec. 6135. Coordination of payments.
 Subtitle C--Payments to Health Plans and Miscellaneous Provisions

Sec. 6200. Assistance to plans.
Sec. 6201. Computation of blended plan payment amount.
Sec. 6203. Payment to community-rated health plans.
Sec. 6204. Calculation and publication of general family share and 
 general employer premium amounts.
Sec. 6205. Adjustment of payments to health plans.
Sec. 6206. Employer payment requirement.
Sec. 6207. Requirement for employer payment and reconciliation 
 reporting.
Sec. 6208. Equal voluntary contribution requirement.
Sec. 6209. Payment arrangements.
Sec. 6210. Enforcement of premium obligations.
Sec. 6211. Determination of uniform per capita conversion factor.
Sec. 6212. Certain employees and employers ineligible for premium 
 assistance.

SEC. 6000. GENERAL DEFINITIONS.

 (a) Definitions Relating to Per Capita Premium Rates.--In this 
title:
 (1) Filed per capita community bid.--The term ``filed per 
 capita community bid'' means the per capita premium bid that is 
 filed with a State for a community-rated plan offered in a 
 health care coverage area under subpart A of part 1 and is 
 available to all community rate eligible individuals enrolling 
 directly with a health plan.
 (2) Accepted per capita cooperative bid.--The term 
 ``accepted per capita cooperative bid'' means the per capita 
 premium rate agreed upon by a cooperative and a plan taking 
 into account any discount to such bid negotiated under section 
 1302(c)(2).
 (3) Final community rate.--The term ``final community 
 rate'' means the filed per capita community bid, taking into 
 account any voluntary reduction in such bid made under section 
 6004(e).
 (4) Final cooperative rate.--The term ``final cooperative 
 bid'' means the accepted per capita cooperative bid, taking 
 into account any voluntary reductions in such bid made under 
 section 6004(e).
 (b) Definitions Related To Weighted Average Per Capita Premium 
Rates.--In this title:
 (1) Weighted average accepted bid.--The term ``weighted 
 average accepted bid'' means, for a health care coverage area 
 for a year, the average across all plans of--
 (A) the filed per capita community bid for each 
 community-rated health plan offered in a health care 
 coverage area weighted to reflect the relative 
 enrollment (net of any enrollment through a 
 cooperative) of community rate eligible individuals 
 among such plans; and
 (B) the accepted per capita cooperative bid for 
 each community-rated health plan offered in a health 
 care coverage area weighted to reflect the relative 
 enrollment of community rate eligible individuals 
 through a cooperative among such plans.
 (2) Weighted average discount rate.--The term ``weighted 
 average discount rate'' means, for a health care coverage area 
 for a year, the lesser of--
 (A) the per capita premium target for the health 
 care coverage area (as defined in section 6003) for the 
 year; or
 (B) the average across all plans of the lesser of--
 (i) the final community rate; or
 (ii) the final cooperative rate, 
 (applicable only for plans offered through the 
 cooperative);
 for each community-rated health plan, weighted to 
 reflect the total enrollment of community rate eligible 
 individuals among such plans.
 (3) Weighted average premium.--The term ``weighted average 
 premium'' means, for a class of enrollment and with respect to 
 a health care coverage area for the year, the product of--
 (A) the weighted average discount rate (as defined 
 in paragraph (2));
 (B) the uniform per capita conversion factor 
 (established under section 6211 for the area; and
 (C) the premium class factor established by the 
 Board for that class under section 1631.
 (d) Incorporation of Other Definitions.--Except as otherwise 
provided in this title, the definitions of terms in subtitle J of title 
I of this Act shall apply to this title.

 Subtitle A--Premium Caps

 PART 1--HEALTH EXPENDITURES OF HEALTH CARE COVERAGE AREAS

 Subpart A--Computation of Targets and Accepted Bids

SEC. 6001. COMPUTATION OF HEALTH CARE COVERAGE AREA INFLATION FACTORS.

 (a) Computation.--
 (1) In general.--This section provides for the computation 
 of factors that limit the growth of premiums for the 
 comprehensive benefit package in community-rated health plans. 
 The Board shall compute and publish, not later than March 1 of 
 each year (beginning with 1995) the health care coverage area 
 inflation factor (as defined in paragraph (2)) for each health 
 care coverage area for the following year.
 (2) Health care coverage areas inflation factor.--In this 
 part, the term ``health care coverage area inflation factor'' 
 means, for a year for a health care coverage area--
 (A) the general health care inflation factor for 
 the year (as defined in paragraph (3));
 (B) adjusted under subsection (c) (to take into 
 account material changes in the demographic and socio-
 economic characteristics of the population of community 
 rate eligible individuals);
 (C) decreased by the percentage adjustment (if any) 
 provided with respect to the health care coverage area 
 under subsection (d) (relating to adjustment for 
 previous excess expenditures); and
 (D) in the case of the year 2001, increased by a 
 factor that the Board determines to reflect the ratio 
 of (i) the actuarial value of the increase in benefits 
 provided in that year under the comprehensive benefit 
 package to (ii) the actuarial value of the benefits 
 that would have been in such package in the year 
 without regard to the increase.
 For purposes of subparagraph (D)(i), the actuarial value of the 
 increase with respect to mental illness and substance abuse 
 services (included within the comprehensive benefit package) 
 shall not exceed an actuarial value based on the amount of the 
 total expenditures that would have been made in 2001 by States 
 and subdivisions of States for mental illness and substance 
 abuse services (included in such package as of 2001) if this 
 Act had not been enacted.
 (3) General health care inflation factor.--
 (A) 1996 through 2000.--In this part, the term 
 ``general health care inflation factor'', for a year, 
 means the percentage increase in the CPI (as specified 
 under subsection (b)) for the year plus the following:
 (i) For 1996, 1.5 percentage points.
 (ii) For 1997, 1.0 percentage points.
 (iii) For 1998, 0.5 percentage points.
 (iv) For 1999 and for 2000, 0 percentage 
 points.
 (B) Years after 2000.--
 (i) Recommendation to congress.--In 1999, 
 the Board shall submit to Congress 
 recommendations, after consultation with the 
 Federal Reserve Board, on what the general 
 health care inflation factor should be for 
 years beginning with 2001.
 (ii) Failure of congress to act.--If the 
 Congress fails to enact a law specifying the 
 general health care inflation factor for a year 
 after 2000, the Board, in January of the year 
 before the year involved, shall compute such 
 factor for the year involved. Such factor shall 
 be the product of the factors described in 
 subparagraph (C) for that fiscal year, minus 1.
 (iii) Study by federal reserve board.--Not 
 later than January 1, 1999, the Federal Reserve 
 Board shall conduct a study, and report to the 
 National Health Board, concerning what the 
 general health care inflation factor should be 
 for years beginning with 2001. Such study shall 
 consider whether continued indexing with 
 respect to such factor is advisable and whether 
 the consumer price index should be used (in 
 whole or in part, modified or unmodified) with 
 respect to premium caps for future years. The 
 recommendations of the Federal Reserve Board 
 under such study shall be considered in the 
 recommendations submitted under clause (i).
 (C) Factors.--The factors described in this 
 subparagraph for a year are the following:
 (i) CPI.--1 plus the percentage change in 
 the CPI for the year, determined based upon the 
 percentage change in the average of the CPI for 
 the 12-month period ending with August 31 of 
 the previous fiscal year over such average for 
 the preceding 12-month period.
 (ii) Real gdp per capita.--1 plus the 
 average annual percentage change in the real, 
 per capita gross domestic product of the United 
 States during the 3-year period ending in the 
 preceding calendar year, determined by the 
 Board based on data supplied by the Department 
 of Commerce.
 (b) Projection of Increase in CPI.--
 (1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the Board 
 shall specify, as of the time of publication, the annual 
 percentage increase in the CPI (as defined in section 1902(9)) 
 for the following year.
 (2) Data to be used.--Such increase shall be the projection 
 of the CPI contained in the budget of the United States 
 transmitted by the President to the Congress in the year.
 (c) Special Adjustment for Material Changes in Demographic 
Characteristics of Population.--
 (1) Adjustment for large group purchaser opt-in.--
 (A) In general.--The Board shall develop a method 
 for adjusting the health care coverage area inflation 
 factor for each health care coverage area in order to 
 reflect material changes in the demographic 
 characteristics of community rate eligible individuals 
 residing in the coverage area (in comparison with such 
 characteristics for the previous year) as a result of 
 the termination of an election of one or more large 
 group purchasers under section 1406.
 (B) Basis for adjustments.--Adjustments under this 
 paragraph (whether an increase or decrease) shall be 
 based on the characteristics and factors used for 
 making adjustments in payments under section 6124.
 (2) Adjustment for area trend compared to national trend.--
 (A) In general.--The Board shall develop a method 
 for adjusting the health care coverage area inflator 
 factor for each health care coverage area in order to 
 reflect material changes in the demographic 
 characteristics (including at least age, gender, and 
 socio-economic status) and health status of community 
 rate eligible individuals residing in the coverage area 
 in comparison with the average change in such 
 characteristics for such individuals residing in the 
 United States. The adjustment under this paragraph 
 shall be for changes not taken into account in the 
 adjustment under paragraph (1).
 (B) Neutral adjustment.--Such method (and any 
 annual adjustment under this paragraph) shall be 
 designed to result in the adjustment effected under 
 this paragraph for a year not changing the weighted 
 average of the health care coverage area inflation 
 factors.
 (3) Application.--The Board shall provide, on an annual 
 basis, for an adjustment of health care coverage area inflation 
 factors under this subsection using such methods.
 (d) Consultation Process.--The Board shall have a process for 
consulting with representatives of States before establishing the 
health care coverage area inflation factors for each year under this 
section.

SEC. 6002. BOARD DETERMINATION OF NATIONAL PER CAPITA BASELINE PREMIUM 
 TARGET.

 (a) In General.--Not later than January 1, 1995, the Board shall 
determine a national per capita baseline premium target. Such target is 
equal to--
 (1) the national average per capita current coverage health 
 expenditures (determined under subsection (b)),
 (2) updated under subsection (c).
 (b) Determination of National Average Per Capita Current Coverage 
Health Expenditures.--
 (1) In general.--The Board shall determine the national 
 average per capita current coverage health expenditures equal 
 to--
 (A) total covered current health care expenditures 
 (described in paragraph (2)), divided by
 (B) the estimated population in the United States 
 of community rate eligible individuals (as determined 
 by the Board as of 1993 under paragraph (4)) for whom 
 such expenditures were determined.
 The population under subparagraph (B) shall not include SSI 
 recipients or AFDC recipients.
 (2) Current health care expenditures.--For purposes of 
 paragraph (1)(A), the Board shall determine current health care 
 expenditures as follows:
 (A) Determination of total expenditures.--The Board 
 shall first determine the amount of total payments made 
 for items and services included in the comprehensive 
 benefit package (determined without regard to cost 
 sharing) in the United States in 1993.
 (B) Removal of certain expenditures not to be 
 covered in the comprehensive benefit package.--The 
 amount so determined shall be decreased by the 
 proportion of such amount that is attributable to any 
 of the following:
 (i) Medicare beneficiaries (other than such 
 beneficiaries who are community rate eligible 
 individuals).
 (ii) AFDC recipients or SSI recipients.
 (iii) Expenditures which are paid for 
 through workers' compensation or automobile or 
 other liability insurance.
 (iv) Expenditures by parties (including the 
 Federal Government) that the Board determines 
 will not be payable by community-rated plans 
 for coverage of the comprehensive benefit 
 package under this Act (as defined in section 
 1101).
 (C) Addition of projected expenditures for 
 uninsured and underinsured individuals.--The amount so 
 determined and adjusted shall be increased to take into 
 account increased utilization of, and expenditures for, 
 items and services covered under the comprehensive 
 benefit package likely to occur, as a result of 
 coverage under a community-rated health plan of 
 individuals who, as of 1993 were uninsured or 
 underinsured with respect to the comprehensive benefit 
 package. In making such determination, such 
 expenditures shall be based on the estimated average 
 cost for such services in 1993 (and not on private 
 payment rates established for such services). In making 
 such determination, the estimated amount of 
 uncompensated care in 1993 shall be removed and will 
 not include adjustments to offset payments below costs 
 by public programs.
 (D) Addition of costs of administration.--The 
 amount so determined and adjusted shall be increased by 
 an estimated percentage (determined by the Board, but 
 no more than 15 percent) that reflects the proportion 
 of premiums that are required for health plan 
 administration for State administration (including 
 costs for administration of income-related premium 
 discounts and cost sharing reductions) and for State 
 premium taxes (which taxes shall be limited to such 
 amounts in 1993 as are attributable to the health 
 benefits to be included in the comprehensive benefit 
 package). Such adjustments shall not include any 
 marketing fees (described in section 1511) or 
 cooperative fees (described in section 1305).
 (E) Decrease for cost sharing.--The amount so 
 determined and adjusted shall be decreased by a 
 percentage that reflects (i) the estimated average 
 percentage of total amounts payable for items and 
 services covered under the comprehensive benefit 
 package that will be payments in the form of cost 
 sharing under a higher cost sharing plan, and (ii) the 
 percentage reduction in utilization estimated to result 
 from the application of high cost sharing.
 (3) Special rules.--
 (A) Benefits used.--The determinations under this 
 section shall be based on the comprehensive benefit 
 package as in effect in 1996.
 (B) Assuming no change in expenditure pattern.--The 
 determination under paragraph (2) shall be made without 
 regard to any change in the pattern of expenditures 
 that may result from the enrollment of AFDC recipients 
 and SSI recipients in community-rated health plans.
 (4) Eligible individuals.--In this subsection, the 
 determination of who are community rate eligible individuals 
 under this subsection shall be made as though this Act was 
 fully in effect in each State as of 1993.
 (c) Updating.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (3), the Board shall 
 update the amount determined under subsection (b)(1) for each 
 of 1994 and 1995 by the appropriate update factor described in 
 paragraph (2) for the year.
 (2) Appropriate update factor.--In paragraph (1), the 
 appropriate update factor for a year is 1 plus the annual 
 percentage increase for the year (as determined by the 
 Secretary, based on actual or projected information) in private 
 sector health care spending for items and services included in 
 the comprehensive benefit package (as of 1996).
 (3) Limit.--The total, cumulative update under this 
 subsection shall not exceed 15 percent.

SEC. 6003. DETERMINATION OF AREA PER CAPITA PREMIUM TARGETS.

 (a) Initial Determination.--Not later than January 1, 1995, the 
Board shall determine, for each health care coverage area for 1996, a 
health care coverage area per capita premium target. Such target shall 
equal--
 (1) the national per capita baseline premium target 
 (determined by the Board under section 6002),
 (2) updated by the health care coverage area inflation 
 factor (as determined under section 6001(a)(2)) for 1996, and
 (3) adjusted by the adjustment factor for the health care 
 coverage area (determined under subsection (c)).
 (b) Subsequent Determinations.--
 (1) Determination.--Not later than March 1 of each year 
 (beginning with 1996) the Board shall determine, for each 
 health care coverage area for the succeeding year a health care 
 coverage area per capita premium target.
 (2) General rule.--Subject to subsection (e), such target 
 shall equal--
 (A) the health care coverage area per capita target 
 determined under this section (without regard to 
 subsection (e)) for the health care coverage area for 
 the previous year,
 (B) updated by the health care coverage area 
 inflation factor (as determined in section 6001(a)) for 
 the year.
 (3) Adjustment for previous excess rate of increase in 
 expenditures.--Such target for a year is subject to a decrease 
 under section 6001(d).
 (c) Adjustment Factors for Health Care Coverage Areas for Initial 
Determination.--
 (1) In general.--The Board shall establish an adjustment 
 factor for each health care coverage area in a manner 
 consistent with this subsection.
 (2) Considerations.--In establishing the factor for each 
 health care coverage area, the Board shall consider, using 
 information of the type described in paragraph (3), the 
 difference between the national average of the factors taken 
 into account in determining the national per capita baseline 
 premium target and such factors for the health care coverage 
 area, including variations in health care expenditures and in 
 rates of uninsurance and underinsurance in the different areas 
 and including variations in the proportion of expenditures for 
 services provided by academic health centers in the different 
 areas.
 (3) Type of information.--The type of information described 
 in this paragraph is--
 (A) information on variations in premiums across 
 States and across health care coverage areas within a 
 State (based on surveys and other data);
 (B) information on variations in per capita health 
 spending by State, as measured by the Secretary;
 (C) information on variations across States in per 
 capita spending under the medicare program and in such 
 spending among health care coverage areas within a 
 State under such program;
 (D) area rating factors commonly used by actuaries;
 (E) information on variations in the extent to 
 which States and health care coverage areas need 
 additional investment because they have successfully 
 controlled health care costs; and
 (F) information on variations among States and 
 health care coverage areas due to underutilization of 
 health care services resulting from geographic barriers 
 and lack of access to health care services, 
 particularly in underserved rural and urban areas.
 (4) Application of factors in neutral manner.--The 
 application of the adjustment factors under this subsection for 
 1996 shall be done in a manner so that the weighted average of 
 the health care coverage area per capita premium targets for 
 1996 is equal to the national per capita baseline premium 
 target determined under section 6002. Such weighted average 
 shall be based on the Board's estimate of the expected 
 distribution of community rate eligible individuals (taken into 
 account under section 6002) among the health care coverage 
 areas.
 (5) Consultation process.--The Board shall have a process 
 for consulting with representatives of States and purchasing 
 cooperative before establishing the adjustment for health care 
 coverage areas under this subsection.
 (d) Treatment of Certain States.--
 (1) Non-participating.--In the case of a State that is not 
 a participating State or otherwise has not established health 
 care coverage areas, the entire State shall be treated under 
 the provisions of this part as composing a single health care 
 coverage area.
 (2) Changes in area boundaries.--In the case of a State 
 that changes the boundaries of its health care coverage areas 
 (including the establishment of such areas after 1996), the 
 Board shall provide a method for computing a health care 
 coverage area per capita premium target for each health care 
 coverage area affected by such change in a manner that--
 (A) reflects the factors taken into account in 
 establishing the adjustment factors for health care 
 coverage areas under subsection (c), and
 (B) results in the weighted average of the newly 
 computed regional targets for the health care coverage 
 areas affected by the change equal to the weighted 
 average of the regional targets for the health care 
 coverage areas as previously established.
 (e) Adjustment for Previous Excess Rate of Increase in 
Expenditures.--
 (1) In general.--If the actual weighted average accepted 
 bid for a health care coverage area for a year (as determined 
 by the Board based on actual enrollment in the first month of 
 the year) exceeds the health care coverage area per capita 
 premium target (determined under this section) for the year, 
 then the health care coverage area per capita premium target 
 shall be reduced, by \1/2\ of the excess percentage (described 
 in paragraph (2)) for the year, for each of the 2 succeeding 
 years.
 (2) Excess percentage.--The excess percentage described in 
 this paragraph for a year is the percentage by which--
 (A) the actual weighted average accepted bid 
 (referred to in paragraph (1)) for a health care 
 coverage area for the year, exceeds
 (B) the health care coverage area per capita 
 premium target (determined under this section) for the 
 year.

SEC. 6004. INITIAL RATE FILING AND BID NEGOTIATION PROCESS.

 (a) Filing and Bidding Process.--
 (1) Filing community bids.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than July 1 before the 
 first year, and not later than August 1 of each 
 succeeding year, each plan seeking to participate as a 
 community-rated health plan, with respect to the health 
 care coverage area, in the following year shall file a 
 per capita community bid in the manner specified under 
 subsection (c).
 (B) Submission of bids to cooperatives.--Each plan 
 filing a per capita community bid with respect to a 
 health care coverage area under subparagraph (A) shall 
 also submit to the cooperative of such health care 
 coverage area a per capita premium bid (not to exceed 
 the rate filed under subparagraph (A) for such plan) 
 for coverage of the comprehensive benefit package as 
 specified in section 1101 in the manner described under 
 subsection (c).
 (C) Establishment of rules and procedures for 
 filing premium bids.--In accordance with section 1660, 
 each participating State shall establish rules and 
 procedures for the filing of premium rates and 
 submission of premium bids by plans.
 (D) Disclosure.--In conjunction with the filing of 
 per capita community bids, the State may determine to 
 disclose (or not to disclose) the health care coverage 
 area per capita premium target for the health care 
 coverage area (determined under section 6003) for the 
 year involved.
 (E) Condition.--Each community bid filed and 
 cooperative bid submitted under this subsection with 
 respect to a community-rated health plan shall be 
 conditioned upon the plan's agreement to accept any 
 payment reduction that may be imposed under section 
 6011.
 (2) Negotiation process.--Following the bidding process 
 under paragraph (1), a cooperative may conduct negotiations 
 with health plans relating to the premiums to be charged for 
 such community-rated health plans within a cooperative. Such 
 negotiations may result in the resubmission of bids to the 
 cooperative, but in no case shall a health plan resubmit a bid 
 that exceeds its prior bid.
 (3) Legally binding bids.--All rates filed and bids 
 submitted under this subsection must be legally binding with 
 respect to the plans involved.
 (4) Acceptance.--
 (A) Per capita community bid.--The final community 
 rate for a community-rated health plan under this 
 subsection shall be considered to be the accepted bid 
 for such plan, except as provided in subsection (e).
 (B) Per capita cooperative bid.--The final 
 cooperative bid submitted to a cooperative for a 
 community-rated health plan under this subsection shall 
 be considered to be the accepted bid for such plan, 
 except as provided in subsection (e).
 (5) Assistance.--The Board shall provide States and 
 cooperatives with such information and technical assistance as 
 may assist such States and cooperatives in carrying out the 
 provisions of this subsection.
 (b) Submission of Information to Board.--By not later than 
September 1 of each year for which community per capita bids are filed 
under subsection (a), each State shall submit to the Board a report 
that discloses for each community-rating area--
 (1) information regarding the per capita community bid 
 filed and accepted cooperative bids negotiated under subsection 
 (a) by the different plans;
 (2)(A) for the first year, any information the Board may 
 request concerning an estimation of the--
 (i) enrollment likely in each such plan of 
 community rate eligible individuals through 
 cooperatives; and
 (ii) the enrollment likely in each such plan of 
 community rate eligible individuals by enrollment 
 mechanisms other than cooperatives in accordance with 
 section 1660, or
 (B) for a succeeding year--
 (i) the actual distribution of enrollment of 
 community rate eligible individuals in community-rated 
 health plans through cooperatives; and
 (ii) the actual distribution of enrollment of 
 community rate eligible individuals in community-rated 
 health plans through enrollment mechanisms other than 
 cooperatives, in accordance with section 1660;
 in the year in which the report is transmitted; and
 (3) limitations on capacity of community-rated health 
 plans.
 (c) Computation of Weighted Average Accepted Bid.--
 (1) In general.--For each health care coverage area the 
 Board shall determine a weighted average accepted bid for each 
 year for which rates are filed with the State under subsection 
 (a). Such determination shall be based on information on 
 accepted bids for the year, submitted under subsection (b)(1), 
 and shall take into account, subject to paragraph (2), the 
 information on enrollment distribution submitted under 
 subsection (b)(2).
 (2) Enrollment distribution rules.--In making the 
 determination under paragraph (1) for a health care coverage 
 area, the Board shall establish rules respecting the treatment 
 of enrollment in plans that are discontinued or are newly 
 offered.
 (3) Exclusion of worksite health promotion discounts.--For 
 purposes of calculating the weighted average accepted bid and 
 enforcing the per capita premium targets in a health care 
 coverage area in a State, the Board shall consider the accepted 
 bids for the year, without consideration or inclusion of any 
 worksite health promotion discount.
 (d) Notice to Certain States.--
 (1) In general.--By not later than October 1 of each year 
 for which rates are filed with a State, the Board shall notify 
 a State--
 (A) if the weighted average accepted bid 
 (determined under subsection (c)) for the health care 
 coverage area is greater than the health care coverage 
 area per capita premium target for such area 
 (determined under section 6003) for the year, and
 (B) of the weighted average discount rate for the 
 health care coverage area.
 (2) Notice of premium reductions.--If notice is provided to 
 a State under paragraph (1), the Board shall notify the State 
 and each noncomplying plan of any plan payment reduction 
 computed under section 6011 for such a plan and the opportunity 
 to voluntarily reduce the accepted bid under subsection (e) in 
 order to avoid such a reduction.
 (e) Voluntary Reduction of Accepted Bids.--After the Board has 
determined under subsection (c) the weighted average accepted bid for a 
health care coverage area and the Board has determined plan payment 
reductions, before such date as the Board may specify (in order to 
provide for an open enrollment period), a noncomplying plan has the 
opportunity to voluntarily reduce its filed community bid (and if 
applicable, its accepted cooperative bid) by the amount of the plan 
payment reduction that would otherwise apply to the plan. Such 
reduction shall not affect the amount of the plan payment reduction for 
any other plan for that year.

SEC. 6005. STATE FINANCIAL INCENTIVES.

 (a) Election.--Any participating State may elect to assume 
responsibility for containment of health care expenditures in the State 
consistent with this part. Such responsibility shall include submitting 
annual reports to the Board on any activities undertaken by the State 
to contain such expenditures. A participating State may regulate the 
rates charged by providers furnishing health care items and services to 
all private payers. Such regulation of rates may not cause an 
experienced-rated health plan to be charged, directly or indirectly, 
rates different from those charged other community-rated health plans 
for the same items and services or otherwise discriminate against 
experience-rated health plans.
 (b) Financial Incentive.--In the case of a State that has made an 
election under subsection (a), if the Board determines for a particular 
year (beginning with the first year) that the statewide weighted 
average of the weighted average discount rates (based on actual average 
enrollment for the year), for health care coverage areas in the State, 
is less than the statewide weighted average of the health care coverage 
area per capita premium targets (based upon such enrollment) for such 
areas for the year, then the amount of the State maintenance-of-effort 
payment under section 9001(b), for the following year, shall be reduced 
by \1/2\ of the product of--
 (1) the amount by which the amount of such statewide 
 average target exceeds the amount of such statewide average 
 accepted bid, divided by the amount of such target; and
 (2) the total of the amount of the Federal payments made in 
 that particular year to the State under subtitle B of title IX.
 (c) Alternative State Provider Payment Systems.--Notwithstanding 
any other provision of law, in the case of an alternative State 
provider payment system that has been approved by the Secretary and in 
continuous operation since July 1, 1977, the payment rates and 
methodologies required under the State system for services provided in 
that State shall apply to all purchasers and payors, including those 
under employee welfare benefit plans authorized under the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, workers' compensation programs 
under State law, the Federal Employees' Compensation Act under chapter 
81 of title 5, United States Code, and Federal employee health benefit 
plans under chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code.

SEC. 6006. RECOMMENDATIONS TO ELIMINATE REGIONAL VARIATIONS IN AREA 
 TARGETS DUE TO VARIATION IN PRACTICE PATTERNS; 
 CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION.

 (a) Establishment of Advisory Commission on Regional Variations in 
Health Expenditures.--The chair of the Board shall establish, by not 
later than 60 days after the date of appointment of the first chair, an 
advisory commission on regional variations in health expenditures.
 (b) Composition.--The advisory commission shall be composed of 
consumers, employers, providers, representatives of health plans, 
States, individuals with expertise in the financing of health care, 
individuals with expertise in the economics of health care, and 
representatives of diverse geographic areas.
 (c) Elimination of Regional Variation in Premiums Due to Practice 
Pattern.--
 (1) Commission study.--The advisory commission shall 
 examine methods of reducing or eliminating variation in health 
 care coverage area per capita premium targets that are clearly 
 due to variation in practice patterns not justified by 
 differences in need for health care services, presence of 
 academic health centers or other facilities meeting research, 
 training, or care needs broader than those of the population in 
 the area, or other factors (such as health care input prices 
 and demographic factors), by 2002.
 (2) Commission report.--The advisory commission shall 
 submit to the Board a report that specifies one or more methods 
 for reducing or eliminating the variation described in 
 paragraph (1).
 (3) Board recommendations.--The Board, after reviewing the 
 report and such other studies as it deems appropriate and after 
 consulting with the Prospective Payment Assessment Commission, 
 the Physician Payment Review Commission and such other experts 
 as it deems appropriate, shall submit to Congress, by not later 
 October 1, 1996, detailed recommendations respecting the 
 specific method to be used to reduce or eliminate the variation 
 described in paragraph (1) by 2006. Such recommendations shall 
 not propose the reduction or elimination of differences in per 
 capita premium targets that are not the result of inappropriate 
 differences in practice patterns and shall be designed to avoid 
 unnecessary disruption in the health care systems and economies 
 of affected regions.
 (d) Congressional Consideration.--
 (1) In general.--Detailed recommendations submitted under 
 subsection (c)(3) shall apply under this subtitle unless a 
 joint resolution (described in paragraph (2)) disapproving such 
 recommendations is enacted, in accordance with the provisions 
 of paragraph (3), before the end of the 60-day period beginning 
 on the date on which such recommendations were submitted. For 
 purposes of applying the preceding sentence and paragraphs (2) 
 and (3), the days on which either House of Congress is not in 
 session because of an adjournment of more than three days to a 
 day certain shall be excluded in the computation of a period.
 (2) Joint resolution of disapproval.--A joint resolution 
 described in this paragraph means only a joint resolution which 
 is introduced within the 10-day period beginning on the date on 
 which the Board submits recommendations under subsection (e)(3) 
 and--
 (A) which does not have a preamble;
 (B) the matter after the resolving clause of which 
 is as follows: ``That Congress disapproves the 
 recommendations of the National Health Board concerning 
 elimination of regional variation in health care 
 coverage area premiums, as submitted by the Board on 
 ______________.'', the blank space being filled in with 
 the appropriate date; and
 (C) the title of which is as follows: ``Joint 
 resolution disapproving recommendations of the National 
 Health Board concerning elimination of regional 
 variation in health care coverage area premiums, as 
 submitted by the Board on ______________.'', the blank 
 space being filled in with the appropriate date.
 (3) Procedures for consideration of resolution of 
 disapproval.--Subject to paragraph (4), the provisions of 
 section 2908 (other than subsection (a)) of the Defense Base 
 Closure and Realignment Act of 1990 shall apply to the 
 consideration of a joint resolution described in paragraph (2) 
 in the same manner as such provisions apply to a joint 
 resolution described in section 2908(a) of such Act.
 (4) Special rules.--For purposes of applying paragraph (3) 
 with respect to such provisions--
 (A) any reference to the Committee on Armed 
 Services of the House of Representatives shall be 
 deemed a reference to an appropriate Committee of the 
 House of Representatives (specified by the Speaker of 
 the House of Representatives at the time of submission 
 of recommendations under subsection (c)(3)) and any 
 reference to the Committee on Armed Services of the 
 Senate shall be deemed a reference to an appropriate 
 Committee of the Senate (specified by the Majority 
 Leader of the Senate at the time of submission of 
 recommendations under subsection (c)(3)); and
 (B) any reference to the date on which the 
 President transmits a report shall be deemed a 
 reference to the date on which the Board submits a 
 recommendation under subsection (c)(3).
 (e) Elimination of Regional Variation State Payment Amounts.--
 (1) Commission study.--The advisory commission shall 
 examine methods of reducing inappropriate variation among 
 States in the level of payments required under subtitle A of 
 title IX by 2002.
 (2) Commission report.--The advisory commission shall 
 submit to the Board a report that specifies one or more methods 
 for reducing the variation described in paragraph (1).
 (3) Board recommendations.--The Board shall submit to 
 Congress, by not later than July 1, 1995, detailed 
 recommendations respecting the specific method to be used to 
 reduce the variation described in paragraph (1) by 2002 in a 
 budget neutral manner with respect to total government payments 
 and payments by the Federal Government. In submitting 
 recommendations under this paragraph, the Board shall consider 
 the fiscal capacity of the States.
 (4) Congressional consideration.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to the succeeding 
 provisions of this paragraph, the provisions of 
 subsection (d) shall apply to recommendations under 
 paragraph (3) in the same manner as they apply to 
 recommendations under subsection (c)(3).
 (B) Special rules.--In applying subparagraph (A)--
 (i) the following shall be substituted for 
 the matter after the resolving clause described 
 in subsection (d)(2)(B): ``That Congress 
 disapproves the recommendations of the National 
 Health Board concerning reduction of regional 
 variation in State payments, as submitted by 
 the Board on ______________.''; and
 (ii) the following shall be substituted for 
 the title described in subsection (d)(2)(C): 
 ``Joint resolution disapproving recommendations 
 of the National Health Board concerning 
 reducing regional variation in State payments, 
 as submitted by the Board on ______________.''.
 (f) Information.--The advisory commission shall provide the Board, 
States, and community-rated health plans with information about 
regional differences in health care costs and practice patterns.

SEC. 6007. REFERENCE TO LIMITATION ON ADMINISTRATIVE AND JUDICIAL 
 REVIEW OF CERTAIN DETERMINATIONS.

 For limitation on administrative and judicial review of certain 
determinations under this part, see section 5232.

SEC. 6008. APPLICATION OF MARKETING AND COOPERATIVE FEES.

 Cooperative fees (as described in section 1305) and health plan 
marketing fees (as described in section 1511(b)) shall not be 
incorporated into the calculation of plan and health care coverage 
areas' compliance with the premium targets established in this part or 
in the determination of eligibility for discounts under subtitle B of 
this title.

 Subpart B--Plan and Provider Payment Reductions to Maintain 
 Expenditures within Targets

SEC. 6011. PLAN PAYMENT REDUCTION.

 (a) Plan Payment Reduction.--In order to assure that premium-
related payments to community-rated health plans offered in a health 
care coverage area are consistent with the applicable area per capita 
target for the health care coverage area (computed under this 
subtitle), payment to a noncomplying plan (as defined in subsection 
(b)(2)) for a year is subject to a reduction in plan payment by the 
amount equal to plan payment reduction specified in subsection (c) for 
the year.
 (b) Noncomplying Health Care Coverage Area and Noncomplying Plan 
Defined.--In this part:
 (1) Noncomplying health care coverage area.--The term 
 ``noncomplying health care coverage area'' means, for a year, a 
 health care coverage area for which the weighted average 
 accepted bid (computed under section 6004(c)) exceeds the 
 health care coverage area per capita premium target for the 
 year.
 (2) Noncomplying plan.--The term ``noncomplying plan'' 
 means, for a year, a community rated health plan offered in a 
 noncomplying health care coverage area if the applicable 
 premium rate for the year exceeds the maximum complying bid (as 
 defined in subsection (d)) for the year. No plan shall be a 
 noncomplying plan for a year before the first year in which the 
 plan is offered as a community rated health plan under this 
 Act.
 (c) Amount of Plan Payment Reduction.--
 (1) In general.--The amount of the plan payment reduction, 
 for a noncomplying plan offered in a health care coverage area, 
 is the area-wide reduction percentage (as defined in paragraph 
 (2)) of the excess bid amount (as defined in paragraph (3)) for 
 the plan.
 (2) Area-wide reduction percentage.--
 (A) In general.--In paragraph (1), the term ``area-
 wide reduction percentage'' means, for a noncomplying 
 plan offered in a health care coverage area for a 
 year--
 (i) the amount by which--
 (I) the weighted average accepted 
 bid (computed under section 6004(c)(1)) 
 for the health care coverage area for 
 the year, exceeds (II) the health care 
 coverage area per capita target for the 
 area for the year; divided by
 (ii) the sum, for noncomplying 
 plans offered in the health care 
 coverage area, of the plan proportions 
 of area excess bid amounts (described 
 in subparagraph (B)(i)) for the year.
 (B) Plan proportion of health care coverage area 
 excess bid amount described.--
 (i) In general.--The ``plan proportion of 
 area excess bid amount'' described in this 
 clause, for a noncomplying plan, is the product 
 of--
 (I) the excess bid amount (as 
 defined in paragraph (3)) for the plan, 
 and
 (II) the plan enrollment proportion 
 (as defined in clause (ii)) for the 
 plan.
 (ii) Plan enrollment proportion.--In clause 
 (i)(II), the term ``plan enrollment 
 proportion'' means, with respect to a health 
 plan offered in a health care coverage area, 
 the total enrollment of community-rate eligible 
 individuals enrolled in such plan expressed as 
 a percentage of the total enrollment of 
 community-rate eligible individuals in all 
 community-rated plans offered in the health 
 care coverage area. Such proportion shall be 
 computed based on the information used in 
 computing the weighted average accepted bid for 
 the area under section 6004(c)(1).
 (3) Excess bid amount.--In this subsection, the ``excess 
 bid amount'', with respect to a noncomplying plan for a year, 
 is the amount by which--
 (A) the accepted bid for the year (not taking into 
 account any voluntary reduction under section 6004(e)), 
 exceeds
 (B) the maximum complying bid (as defined in 
 subsection (d)) for the plan for the year.
 (d) Community-Rated Health Plans With an Accepted Cooperative Bid 
Not Equal to the Final Community Rate for Such Plan.--
 (1) In general.--For the purposes of this section (relating 
 to determining plan compliance and plan payment reduction), if 
 a community-rated health plan has more than one applicable 
 premium rate, such health plan shall be treated as a separate 
 health plan with respect to each applicable premium rate and 
 the enrollment in each such health plan shall be considered to 
 be the number of community-rated individuals enrolled in the 
 community-rated plan at the applicable premium rate.
 (2) The applicable final premium rate with respect to a 
 community rated health plan shall be--
 (A) for a community-rated plan offered through the 
 state-designated enrollment process (or through any 
 other manner of enrollment other than through a 
 cooperative), the final community rate; or
 (B) for a community rated health plan offered 
 through a cooperative, the final cooperative rate for 
 such cooperative.
 (e) Maximum Complying Bid.--
 (1) In general.--In this part for the first year and for 
 subsequent years, the ``maximum complying bid'' for each 
 community-rated health plan, is the health care coverage area 
 per capita premium target for the area (determined under 
 section 6003) for the year.
 (2) Special rules for new plans.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), in 
 the case of a community rated health plan that is first 
 offered in a health care coverage area in a year after 
 the first year the maximum complying bid shall be the 
 health care coverage area per capita premium target for 
 the year.
 (B) Authority.--The Board or a State may establish 
 rules to modify the application of subparagraph (A) for 
 community-rated health plans in the State in order--
 (i) to prevent abusive premium practices by 
 entities previously offering plans, or
 (ii) to encourage the availability of all 
 types of plans in the State and to permit 
 establishment of new plans.

SEC. 6012. PROVIDER PAYMENT REDUCTION.

 (a) Participating Providers.--
 (1) In general.--Each community-rated health plan in the 
 health care coverage area, as part of its contract or agreement 
 with any participating provider or group of participating 
 providers shall--
 (A) include a provision that provides that if the 
 plan is a noncomplying plan for a year, payments to the 
 provider (or group) shall be reduced by the applicable 
 network reduction percentage (described in paragraph 
 (2)) for the year; and
 (B) not include any provision which the State 
 determines otherwise varies the payments to such 
 providers (or group) because of, or in relation to, a 
 plan payment reduction under section 6011 or otherwise 
 is intended to nullify the effect of subparagraph (A).
 For purposes of this section, a plan described in section 
 6011(d) shall be treated as a single plan with the total 
 enrollment of such plan equal to the sum of the amounts 
 described in section 6011(d)(1). The Board may issue 
 regulations relating to the requirements of this paragraph.
 (2) Applicable network reduction percentage.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the 
 ``applicable network reduction percentage'', with 
 respect to participating providers of a noncomplying 
 plan for a year equals--
 (i) the plan payment reduction amount for 
 the plan for the year (as determined under 
 section 6011(c)), divided by
 (ii) the final accepted bid for the plan 
 for the year, adjusted under subparagraph (B).
 (B) Induced volume offset.--The Board shall provide 
 for an appropriate increase of the percentage reduction 
 computed under subparagraph (A) to take into account 
 any estimated increase in volume of services provided 
 that may reasonably be anticipated as a consequence of 
 applying a reduction in payment under this subsection. 
 The Board may compute and apply such increase 
 differently for different classes of providers or 
 services or different types of health plans (as the 
 Board may define).
 (b) Other Providers.--
 (1) In general.--Each community rated health plan that is a 
 noncomplying plan in a year shall provide for a reduction in 
 the amount of payments to providers (or groups of providers) 
 that are not participating providers under the applicable fee 
 schedule under section 1523 by the applicable non-network 
 reduction percentage (described in paragraph (2)) for the year.
 (2) Applicable nonnetwork reduction percentage.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the 
 ``applicable nonnetwork reduction percentage'', with 
 respect to nonparticipating providers of a noncomplying 
 plan for a year is--
 (i) the plan payment reduction amount for 
 the plan for the year (as determined under 
 section 6011(c)), divided by
 (ii) the final accepted bid for the plan 
 for the year, adjusted under subparagraph (B).
 (B) Induced volume offset.--The Board shall provide 
 for an appropriate increase of the percentage reduction 
 computed under subparagraph (A) to take into account 
 any estimated increase in volume of services provided 
 that may reasonably be anticipated as a consequence of 
 applying a reduction in payment under this subsection. 
 The Board may compute and apply such increase 
 differently for different classes of providers or 
 services or different types of health plans (as the 
 Board may define).
 (c) Application to Cost Sharing and to Balance Billing 
Restrictions.--For purposes of applying section 1523 (relating to 
balance billing limitations) and part 2 of subtitle B of title I 
(relating to computation of cost sharing), the payment basis otherwise 
used for computing any limitation on billing or cost sharing shall be 
such payment basis as adjusted by any reductions effected under this 
section.

 PART 2--HEALTH EXPENDITURES OF LARGE GROUP PURCHASERS

SEC. 6021. CALCULATION OF PREMIUM EQUIVALENTS.

 (a) In General.--By January 1, 1998, the Board shall develop a 
methodology for calculating an annual per capita expenditure equivalent 
for amounts paid for coverage for the comprehensive benefit package 
within a large group purchaser.
 (b) Adjustment Permitted.--Such methodology shall permit a large 
group purchaser to petition the Secretary of Labor for an adjustment of 
the inflation adjustment that would otherwise apply to compensate for 
material changes in the demographic characteristics of the experience 
rate eligible individuals receiving coverage through plans offered in a 
health care coverage area.
 (c) Reporting.--In 2001 and each subsequent year, each large group 
purchaser shall report to the Secretary of Labor, in a form and manner 
specified by the Secretary, the average of the annual per capita 
expenditure equivalent for the previous 3-year period.

SEC. 6022. SANCTIONS FOR LARGE GROUP PURCHASER FOR EXCESS INCREASE IN 
 EXPENDITURES.

 (a) Sanction.--
 (1) Actions against large employers.--If a large group 
 purchaser that is a large employer has two excess years (as 
 defined in subsection (b)) in a 3-year-period, then, effective 
 beginning with the second year following the second excess year 
 in such period, the Secretary of Labor shall take action under 
 section 1402.
 (2) Termination of sponsorship for other large group 
 purchasers.--If a large group purchaser that is not a large 
 employer has two excess years (as defined in subsection (b)) in 
 a 3-year-period, then, effective beginning with the second year 
 following the second excess year in such period--
 (A) the Secretary of Labor shall terminate the 
 election of the large group purchaser under section 
 1402; and
 (B) an employer that was an experience-rated 
 employer with respect to such purchaser shall become a 
 community-rated employer (unless the employer has 
 become an experience-rated employer of another such 
 large group purchaser).
 (3) Initial 3-year period.--Paragraph (1) shall apply to 
 the 3-year period beginning on January 1, 1998.
 (b) Excess Year.--
 (1) In general.--In subsection (a), the term ``excess 
 year'' means, for a large group purchaser, a year (after 2000) 
 for which the rate of increase for the large group purchaser 
 (specified in paragraph (2)) for the year, exceeds the national 
 corporate inflation factor (specified in paragraph (3)) for the 
 year.
 (2) Rate of increase for large group purchaser.--The rate 
 of increase for a large group purchaser for a year, specified 
 in this paragraph, is the percentage by which the average of 
 the annual per capita expenditure equivalent for the large 
 group purchaser (reported under section 6021 (c)) for the 3-
 year period ending with such year, exceeds the average of the 
 annual per capita expenditure equivalent for the large group 
 purchaser (reported under such subsection) for the 3-year 
 period ending with the previous year.
 (3) National corporate inflation factor.--The national 
 corporate inflation factor for a year, specified in this 
 paragraph, is the average of the general health care inflation 
 factors (as defined in section 6001(a)(3)) for each of the 3 
 years ending with such year.

 PART 3--TREATMENT OF SINGLE-PAYER STATES

SEC. 6031. SPECIAL RULES FOR SINGLE-PAYER STATES.

 In the case of a Statewide single-payer State, for purposes of 
section 1222(6), the Board shall compute a Statewide per capita premium 
target for each year in the same manner as the health care coverage 
area per capita premium target is determined under section 6003.

 PART 4--TRANSITION PROVISIONS

SEC. 6041. MONITORING PRICES AND EXPENDITURES.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall establish a program to monitor 
prices and expenditures in the health care system in the United States.
 (b) Reports.--The Secretary shall periodically report to the 
President on--
 (1) the rate of increase in expenditures in each sector of 
 the health care system, and
 (2) how such rates compare with rate of overall increase in 
 health care spending and rate of increase in the consumer price 
 index.
 (c) Access to Information.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary may obtain, through surveys 
 or otherwise, information on prices and expenditures for health 
 care services. The Secretary may compel health care providers 
 and third party payers to disclose such information as is 
 necessary to carry out the program under this section.
 (2) Confidentiality.--Non-public information obtained under 
 this subsection with respect to individual patients is 
 confidential.
 (d) Periodic Reports.--The Secretary shall periodically issue 
public reports on the matters described in subsection (b).

SEC. 6042. HEALTH CARE UTILIZATION RESEARCH PROGRAM.

 To assist health plans in determining the appropriate cost of 
services to populations not previously covered by private health 
insurance, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall conduct a 
program of research on the characteristics and health care utilization 
patterns of such populations, including Medicaid eligible individuals, 
unemployed individuals, and out-of-labor force individuals. Not later 
than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, such program 
shall be completed and a report concerning such program shall be 
submitted by the Secretary to health plans in such form as the 
Secretary determines is the most useful to such plans

 Subtitle B--Premium-Related Financings

 PART 1--FAMILY PREMIUM PAYMENTS

 Subpart A--Family Share

SEC. 6101. FAMILY SHARE OF PREMIUM.

 (a) Requirement.--Each family enrolled in a community-rated health 
plan or in a, experienced-rated health plan in a class of family 
enrollment is responsible for payment of the family share of premium 
payable respecting such enrollment. Such premium may be paid by an 
employer or other person on behalf of such a family.
 (b) Family Share of Premium Defined.--
 (1) In general.--In this subtitle, the term ``family share 
 of premium'' means, with respect to enrollment of a family--
 (A) in a community-rated health plan, the amount 
 specified in paragraph (2) for the class, or
 (B) in an experienced-rated health plan, the amount 
 specified in paragraph (3) for the class.
 (2) Community-rated plans.--
 (A) In general.--The amount specified in this 
 paragraph for a health plan based on a class of family 
 enrollment is the sum of the base amounts described in 
 subparagraph (B) reduced (but not below zero) by the 
 sum of the amounts described in subparagraph (C).
 (B) Base.--The base amounts described in this 
 subparagraph (for a plan for a class of enrollment) are 
 as follows:
 (i) Plan premium.--The applicable premium 
 specified in section 6102(a) with respect to 
 such class of enrollment.
 (ii) Family collection shortfall.--20 
 percent of the family collection shortfall add-
 on (computed under section 6107 for such 
 class).
 (iii) Marketing fee.--Any applicable 
 marketing fee as described in section 1511(b).
 (C) Credits and discounts.--The amounts described 
 in this subparagraph (for a plan for a class of 
 enrollment) are as follows:
 (i) Family credit.--The amount of the 
 family credit under section 6103(a).
 (ii) Income related discount.--The amount 
 of any income-related discount provided under 
 section 6104(a)(1).
 (iii) Excess premium credit.--The amount of 
 any excess premium credit provided under 
 section 6105.
 (iv) Large group sponsor opt-in credit.--
 The amount of any large group sponsor opt-in 
 credit provided under section 6106.
 (v) Additional credit for ssi and afdc 
 recipients.--In the case of an SSI or AFDC 
 family or for whom the amount described in 
 clause (ii) is equal to the amount described in 
 section 6104(b)(1)(A), the amount described in 
 subparagraph (B)(ii).
 (D) Limit on miscellaneous credits.--In no case 
 shall the family share, due to credits under 
 subparagraph (C), be less than zero.
 (E) Limitation.--In no case shall the family share 
 for a particular plan be greater than the premium 
 otherwise payable under section 6101 due to the 
 application of the worksite health promotion discount 
 under section 6102(a)(1) and the worksite health 
 promotion adjustment to the credit under section 6103.
 (3) Experience-rated plans.--
 (A) In general.--The amount specified in this 
 paragraph for an experience-rated health plan based on 
 a class of family enrollment is the premium described 
 in subparagraph (B) reduced (but not below zero) by the 
 sum of the amounts described in subparagraph (C).
 (B) Premium.--The premium described in this 
 subparagraph (for a plan for a class of enrollment) is 
 the premium specified under section 1404 with respect 
 to the plan and class of enrollment involved.
 (C) Credits and discounts.--The amounts described 
 in this subparagraph (for a plan for a class of 
 enrollment) are as follows:
 (i) Family credit.--The amount of the 
 family credit under section 6103(b).
 (ii) Income related discount.--The amount 
 of any income-related discount provided under 
 section 6104(a)(2).

SEC. 6102. AMOUNT OF PREMIUM.

 (a) Community-Rated Plans.--The amount of the applicable premium 
charged by a community-rated health plan for all families in a class of 
family enrollment under a community-rated health plan offered in the 
health care coverage area--
 (1) with respect to a family enrolled through a mechanism 
 other than a cooperative, equal to the product of--
 (A) the final community rate for the plan (as 
 defined in section 6000(a)(3)),
 (B) the uniform per capita conversion factor (as 
 specified in section 6211) for the health care coverage 
 area, and
 (C) the premium class factor established by the 
 Board for that class under section 1631;
 increased for any applicable marketing fees (described in 
 section 1511); or
 (2) with respect to a family enrolled through a 
 cooperative, equal to the product of--
 (A) the final cooperative rate for the plan (as 
 defined in section 6000(a)(4));
 (B) the uniform per capita conversion factor 
 (described under section 6211) for the health care 
 coverage area;
 (C) the premium class factor established by Board 
 for that class under section 1631.
 (b) Reference to Other Premiums.--The amount of the premium charged 
by a large group purchaser for all families in a class of family 
enrollment under an experience-rated health plan offered by the 
purchaser is specified under section 1404.
 (c) Special Rules for Divided Families.--In the case of an 
individual who is a qualifying employee of an employer, if the 
individual has a spouse or child who is not treated as part of the 
individual's family because of section 1012--
 (1) the combined premium for both families under this 
 section shall be computed as though such section had not 
 applied if such combined premium is less than the total of the 
 premiums otherwise applicable (without regard to this 
 subsection),
 (2) the large group purchaser and the entity described in 
 section 1252 shall divide such combined premium between the 
 families proportionally (consistent with rules established by 
 the Board), and
 (3) in such case, credits and other amounts shall be pro-
 rated in a manner consistent with rules established by the 
 Board.

SEC. 6103. FAMILY CREDIT.

 (a) Community-Rated Plans.--The credit provided under this section 
for a family enrolled in a community-rated plan for a class of family 
enrollment is equal to 80 percent of the weighted average premium (as 
defined in section 6000(b)) for community-rated plans offered in the 
health care coverage area for the class.
 (b) Experience-Rated Plans.--The credit provided under this section 
for a family enrolled in an experience-rated health plan for a class of 
family enrollment is equal to the minimum employer premium payment 
required under section 6131 with respect to the family.

SEC. 6104. PREMIUM DISCOUNT BASED ON INCOME.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Enrollees in community-rated plans.--Subject to 
 paragraph (2), each family enrolled with a community-rated or 
 experience-rated plan is entitled to a premium discount under 
 this section, in the amount specified in subsection (b)(1) if 
 the family--
 (A) is an AFDC or SSI family;
 (B) is determined, under subtitle C of title I, to 
 have family adjusted income below 150 percent of the 
 applicable poverty level; or
 (C) is a family described in subsection (c)(3) for 
 which the family obligation amount under subsection (c) 
 for the year would otherwise exceed a specified percent 
 of family adjusted income described in such subsection.
 (2) No liability for indians and certain veterans and 
 military personnel.--
 (A) In general.--In the case of an individual 
 described in subparagraph (B), because the applicable 
 health plan does not impose any premium for such an 
 individual, the individual is not eligible for any 
 premium discount under this section.
 (B) Individuals described.--An individual described 
 in this subparagraph is--
 (i) an electing veteran (as defined in 
 section 1012(d)(1)) who is enrolled under a 
 health plan of the Department of Veterans 
 Affairs and who, under the laws and rules as in 
 effect as of December 31, 1994, has a service-
 connected disability or who is unable to defray 
 the expenses of necessary care as determined 
 under section 1722(a) of title 38, United 
 States Code;
 (ii) active duty military personnel (as 
 defined in section 1012(d)(2)); and
 (iii) an electing Indian (as defined in 
 section 1012(d)(3)).
 (3) Monthly application to afdc and ssi families.--
 Paragraph (1)(A) (and the family obligation amount under 
 subsection (c) insofar as it relates to an AFDC or SSI family) 
 shall be applied to the premium or family obligation amount 
 only for months in which the family is such an AFDC or SSI 
 family.
 (b) Amount of Premium Discount.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to the succeeding paragraphs of 
 this subsection, the amount of the premium discount under this 
 subsection for a family under a class of family enrollment is 
 equal to--
 (A) 20 percent of--
 (i) for a family enrolled in a community-
 rated plan offered in a community-rating area, 
 the weighted average premium for community-
 rated plans offered in the community-rating 
 area, increased by any amount provided under 
 paragraph (2); or
 (ii) for a family enrolled in an 
 experience-rated plan offered in a premium 
 area, the weighted average premium for 
 experience-rated plans offered in the premium 
 area (as determined under section 
 6131(b)(1)(A)) or, if less, the amount 
 determined under clause (i) for the community-
 rating area in which the family resides;
 reduced (but not below zero) by--
 (B) the sum of--
 (i) the family obligation amount described 
 in subsection (c); and
 (ii) the amount of any employer payment 
 (not required under part 2) towards the family 
 share of premiums for covered members of the 
 family.
 (2) Increase for community-rated families to assure 
 enrollment in at-or-below-average-cost plan.--In the case of a 
 family enrolled in a community-rated plan, if a State 
 determines that a family eligible for a discount under this 
 section is unable to enroll in an at-or-below-average-cost plan 
 (as defined in paragraph (3)) that serves the area in which the 
 family resides, the amount of the premium discount under this 
 subsection is increased to the extent that such amount will 
 permit the family to enroll in a community-rated plan without 
 the need to pay a family share of premium under this part in 
 excess of the sum described in paragraph (1)(B).
 (3) At-or-below-average-cost plan defined.--In this 
 section, the term ``at-or-below-average-cost plan'' means a 
 community-rated plan the premium for which does not exceed, for 
 the class of family enrollment involved, the weighted average 
 premium for the community-rating area.
 (c) Family Obligation Amount.--
 (1) Determination.--Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the 
 family obligation amount under this subsection is determined as 
 follows:
 (A) No obligation if income below income threshold 
 amount or if afdc or ssi family.--If the family 
 adjusted income (as defined in section 1282(d)) of the 
 family is less than the income threshold amount 
 (specified in paragraph (4)) or if the family is an 
 AFDC or SSI family, the family obligation amount is 
 zero.
 (B) Income above income threshold amount.--If such 
 income is at least such income threshold amount and the 
 family is not an AFDC or SSI family, the family 
 obligation amount is the sum of the following:
 (i) For income (above income threshold 
 amount) up to the poverty level.--The product 
 of the initial marginal rate (specified in 
 paragraph (2)) and the amount by which--
 (I) the family adjusted income (not 
 including any portion that exceeds the 
 applicable poverty level for the class 
 of family involved), exceeds;
 (II) such income threshold amount.
 (ii) Graduated phase out of discount up to 
 150 percent of poverty level.--The product of 
 the final marginal rate (specified in paragraph 
 (2)) and the amount by which the family 
 adjusted income exceeds 100 percent (but is 
 less than 150 percent) of the applicable 
 poverty level.
 (2) Marginal rates.--In paragraph (1), for a year:
 (A) Initial marginal rate.--The initial marginal 
 rate is the ratio of--
 (i) 3 percent of the applicable poverty 
 level for the class of enrollment involved for 
 the year; to
 (ii) the amount by which such poverty level 
 exceeds such income threshold amount.
 (B) Final marginal rate.--The final marginal rate 
 is 5.7 percent.
 (3) Limitation to 3.9 percent for all families.--
 (A) In general.--In no case shall the family 
 obligation amount under this subsection for the year 
 exceed 3.9 percent.
 (B) Indexing of percentage.--
 (i) In general.--The percentage specified 
 in subparagraph (A) shall be adjusted for any 
 year after 1994 so that the percentage for the 
 year bears the same ratio to the percentage so 
 specified as the ratio of--
 (I) 1 plus the general health care 
 inflation factor (as defined in section 
 6001(a)(3)) for the year, bears to
 (II) 1 plus the percentage 
 specified in section 1135 (relating to 
 indexing of dollar amounts related to 
 cost sharing) for the year.
 (ii) Rounding.--Any adjustment under clause 
 (i) for a year shall be rounded to the nearest 
 multiple of 1/10 of 1 percentage point.
 (4) Income threshold amount.--
 (A) In general.--For purposes of this subtitle, the 
 income threshold amount specified in this paragraph is 
 $1,000 (adjusted under subparagraph (B)).
 (B) Indexing.--For the 1-year period beginning on 
 January 1, 1995, the income threshold amount specified 
 in subparagraph (A) shall be increased or decreased by 
 the same percentage as the percentage increase or 
 decrease by which the average CPI (described in section 
 1902(12)) for the 12-month-period ending with August 31 
 of the preceding year exceeds such average for the 12-
 month period ending with August 31. 1993.
 (C) Rounding.--Any increase or decrease under 
 subparagraph (B) for a year shall be rounded to the 
 nearest multiple of $10.

SEC. 6105. EXCESS PREMIUM CREDIT.

 (a) In General.--If plan payment reductions are made for one or 
more community-rated health plans offered in a health care coverage 
area for plan payments in a year under section 6021, all families 
enrolling in community-rated health plans shall receive a credit under 
this section, in the amount described in subsection (b), in the case of 
each family enrolled in a community-rated health plan offered in the 
health care coverage area for premiums in the year.
 (b) Amount of Credit.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the amount of 
 the credit under this subsection, for a family enrolled in a 
 class of family enrollment in a health care coverage area for a 
 year, is the amount that would be the weighted average premium 
 for such area, class, and year, if the per capita excess 
 premium amount (determined under subsection (c)) for the area 
 for the year were substituted for the weighted average discount 
 rate for the health care coverage area for the year.
 (2) Adjustment to account for use of estimates.--Subject to 
 section 9201, if the total payments made to all community-rated 
 health plans in a year under section 6203 exceeds (or is less 
 than) the total of such payments estimated by the State (based 
 on the weighted average discount rate under subsection (c)(1)), 
 because of a difference between--
 (A) the State's estimate of the distribution of 
 enrolled families between excess premium plans and 
 other plans, and
 (B) the actual distribution of such enrolled 
 families among such plans,
 the amount of the credit under this section in the second 
 succeeding year shall be reduced (or increased, respectively) 
 by the amount of such excess (or deficit) in the total of such 
 payments made to all such plans.
 (c) Per Capita Excess Premium Amount.--The per capita excess 
premium amount, for a health care coverage area for a year, is the 
amount by which--
 (1) the weighted average discount rate (as defined in 
 section 6000(a)(2)) for the area for the year, exceeds
 (2) the health care coverage area per capita premium target 
 for the area for the year.

SEC. 6106. LARGE GROUP PURCHASER OPT-IN CREDIT.

 (a) In General.--If community-rated individuals are owed a payment 
adjustment under section 6124 for a year, then the State shall provide 
for a credit under this section equal to 20 percent of the amount 
described in subsection (b), in the case of each family enrolled in a 
community-rated plan offered in the health care coverage area.
 (b) Amount of Credit.--The amount described in this subsection, for 
a family enrolled in a class of family enrollment for a health care 
coverage area for a year, is the amount that would be the weighted 
average premium for such area, class, and year, if the per capita large 
group purchaser opt-in amount (determined under subsection (c)) for the 
area for the year were substituted for the weighted average discount 
rate for the area for the year.
 (c) Per Capita Large Group Purchaser Opt-in Amount.--The per capita 
large group purchaser opt-in amount, for a health care coverage area 
for a year, is--
 (1) the total amount of the payment adjustments owed for 
 the year under section 6124, divided by
 (2) the estimated average number of community rate eligible 
 individuals in the health care coverage area during the year 
 (reduced by the average number of such individuals whose family 
 share of premiums, determined without regard to this section 
 and section 6107, is zero).

SEC. 6107. FAMILY COLLECTION SHORTFALL ADD-ON.

 (a) In General.--The family collection shortfall add-on, for a 
health care coverage area for a class of enrollment for a year, is the 
amount that would be the weighted average premium for such area, class, 
and year, if the per capita collection shortfall amount (determined 
under subsection (b)) for the area for the year were substituted for 
the weighted average discount rate for the health care coverage area 
for the year.
 (b) Computation of Per Capita Adjustment for Collection 
Shortfalls.--
 (1) Per capita collection shortfall amount.--The per capita 
 collection shortfall amount, for a health care coverage area 
 for a year, under this subsection is equal to--
 (A) the amount estimated under paragraph (2)(A) for 
 the year, divided by
 (B) the estimated average number of community rate 
 eligible individuals in the health care coverage area 
 during the year (reduced by the average number of such 
 individuals whose family share of premiums, determined 
 without regard to this section and section 6106, is 
 zero).
 (2) Aggregate collection shortfall.--
 (A) In general.--Each State shall estimate, for 
 each year (beginning with the first year) the total 
 amount of payments which the State can reasonably 
 identify as owed to community-rated health plans under 
 this Act (taking into account any premium reduction or 
 discount under this subtitle and including amounts owed 
 under subpart B and not taking into account any 
 penalties) for the year and not likely to be collected 
 (after making collection efforts described in section 
 6209) during a period specified by the Secretary 
 beginning on the first day of the year.
 (B) Exclusion of government debts.--The amount 
 under subparagraph (A) shall not include any payments 
 owed to a community-rated health plan by the Federal, 
 State, or local governments.
 (C) Adjustment for previous shortfall estimation 
 discrepancy.--Subject to section 9201, the amount 
 estimated under this paragraph for a year shall be 
 adjusted to reflect over (or under) estimations in the 
 amounts so computed under this paragraph for previous 
 years (based on actual collections), taking into 
 account interest payable based upon borrowings (or 
 savings) attributable to such over or under 
 estimations.
 (c) Apportionment of Adjustment.--The Board shall implement a 
method for the distribution of the aggregate collection shortfall 
amount for each health care coverage area (as described in (b)(2)) 
across premiums in the area. Such method shall reflect a blend of each 
plan's share of the area's aggregate shortfall and the unadjusted per-
capita collection shortfall amount.

SEC. 6108. NO LOSS OF COVERAGE.

 In no case shall the failure to pay amounts owed under this Act 
result in an individual's or family's loss of coverage.

SEC. 6109. APPLICATION OF ADJUSTMENTS.

 Per-capita adjustments described in sections 6105, 6106, 6107 and 
6125 shall be converted into adjustments applicable to each class of 
premium under a methodology to be established by the Board.

 Subpart B--Repayment of Family Credit by Certain Families

SEC. 6110. REPAYMENT OF FAMILY CREDIT BY CERTAIN FAMILIES.

 (a) In General.--Subject to the succeeding provisions of this 
subpart, each family which is provided a family credit under section 
6103(a) for a class of enrollment is liable for repayment of an amount 
equal to the base employment monthly premium (applicable to such class) 
for the month under section 6122.
 (b) Reduction for Self-Employment Payments.--The liability of a 
family under this section for a year shall be reduced (but not below 
zero) by the amount of any employer payments made in the year under 
section 6126 based on the net earnings from self-employment of a family 
member.

SEC. 6111. NO LIABILITY FOR FAMILIES EMPLOYED FULL-TIME; REDUCTION IN 
 LIABILITY FOR PART-TIME EMPLOYMENT.

 (a) In General.--The amount of any liability under section 6110 
shall be reduced, in accordance with rules established by the National 
Health Board consistent with this section, based on employer premiums 
payable under section 6121 with respect to the employment of a family 
member who is a qualifying employee or with respect to a family member. 
In no case shall the reduction under this section result in any payment 
owing to a family.
 (b) Credit for Full-Time and Part-Time Employment.--
 (1) In general.--Under rules of the Board, in the case of a 
 family enrolled under a class of family enrollment, if a family 
 member is a qualifying employee for a month and (except in the 
 case described in section 6114(a)) the employer is liable for 
 payment under section 6121 based on such employment--
 (A) Full-time employment credit.--If the employment 
 is on a full-time basis (as defined in section 
 1901(b)(2)(A)) the liability under section 6110 shall 
 be reduced by the credit amount described in 
 subparagraph (C).
 (B) Part-time employment credit.--If the employment 
 is on a part-time basis (as defined in section 
 1901(b)(2)(A)) the liability under section 6110 shall 
 be reduced by the employment ratio (as defined in 
 section 1901(b)(2)(B)) of the credit amount described 
 in subparagraph (C).
 (C) Full-time monthly credit.--The amount of the 
 credit under this subparagraph, with respect to 
 employment by an employer in a month, is \1/12\ (or, if 
 applicable, the fraction described in paragraph (2)) of 
 the amount owed under section 6110, based on the class 
 of enrollment, for the year.
 (2) Coverage during only part of a year.--In the case of a 
 family that is not enrolled in a community-rated health plan 
 for all the months in a year, the fraction described in this 
 paragraph is 1 divided by the number of months in the year in 
 which the family was enrolled in such a plan.
 (3) Aggregation of credits.--For purposes of paragraph 
 (1)--
 (A) Individuals.--In the case of an individual who 
 is a qualifying employee of more than one employer in a 
 month, the credit for the month shall equal the sum of 
 the credits earned with respect to employment by each 
 employer. Such sum may exceed the credit amount 
 described in paragraph (1)(C).
 (B) Couples.--In the case of a couple each spouse 
 of which is a qualifying employee in a month, the 
 credit for the month shall equal the sum of the credits 
 earned with respect to employment by each spouse. Such 
 sum may exceed the credit amount described in paragraph 
 (1)(C).
 (c) Treatment of Change of Enrollment Status.--In the case of a 
family for which the class of family enrollment changes during a year, 
the Board shall establish rules for appropriate conversion and 
allocation of the credit amounts under the previous provisions of this 
section in a manner that reflects the relative values of the base 
employment monthly premiums (as determined under section 6122) among 
the different classes of family enrollment.

SEC. 6112. LIMITATION OF LIABILITY BASED ON INCOME.

 (a) In General.--In the case of an eligible family described in 
subsection (b), the repayment amount required under this subpart (after 
taking into account any work credit earned under section 6111) with 
respect to a year shall not exceed the amount of liability described in 
subsection (c) for the year.
 (b) Eligible Family Described.--An eligible family described in 
this subsection is a family which is determined, under section 1282 by 
the State for the health care coverage area in which the family 
resides, to have wage-adjusted income (as defined in subsection (d)) 
below 300 percent of the applicable poverty level.
 (c) Amount of Liability.--
 (1) Determination.--Subject to subsection (f), in the case 
 of a family enrolled in a class of enrollment with wage-
 adjusted income (as defined in subsection (d)), the amount of 
 liability under this subsection is determined as follows:
 (A) No obligation if income below income threshold 
 amount or if afdc or ssi family.--If such income is 
 than the income threshold amount (specified in section 
 6104(c)(4)) or if the family is an AFDC or SSI family, 
 the amount of liability is zero.
 (B) Income above income threshold amount.--If such 
 income is at least such income threshold amount and the 
 family is not an AFDC or SSI family, the amount of 
 liability is the sum of the following:
 (i) Four percent of income (above income 
 threshold amount) up to the poverty level.--The 
 initial marginal rate (specified in paragraph 
 (2)(A)) of the amount by which--
 (I) the wage-adjusted income (not 
 including any portion that exceeds the 
 applicable poverty level for the class 
 of family involved), exceeds
 (II) such income threshold amount.
 (ii) Second marginal rate.--The second 
 marginal rate (specified in paragraph (2)(B) of 
 the amount by which--
 (I) the wage adjusted income (not 
 including any portion that exceeds 
 twice the applicable poverty level for 
 the class of family involved), exceeds
 (II) the applicable poverty level 
 for the class of family enrollment.
 (iii) Final marginal rate.--Where wage-
 adjusted income exceeds 200 percent of the 
 applicable poverty level, the final marginal 
 rate (specified in paragraph (2)(C)) of the 
 amount by which the wage-adjusted income 
 exceeds 100 percent of the applicable poverty 
 level.
 (2) Marginal rates.--In paragraph (1)--
 (A) Initial marginal rate.--The initial marginal 
 rate, for a year for a class of enrollment, is the 
 ratio of--
 (i) 4 percent of the applicable poverty 
 level for the class of enrollment for the year, 
 to
 (ii) the amount by which such poverty level 
 exceeds such income threshold amount.
 (B) Second marginal rate.--The second marginal 
 rate, for a year for the class of enrollment, is 7.6 
 percent.
 (C) Final marginal rate.--The final marginal rate, 
 for a year for a class of enrollment, is the ratio of--
 (i) the amount by which (I) the amount of 
 the repayment amount described in section 
 6111(a) exceeds (II) 5.8 percent of twice the 
 applicable poverty level (for the class and 
 year); to
 (ii) 200 percent of such poverty level.
 (3) Second marginal rate.--
 (A) In general.--If, for a class of enrollment for 
 a health care coverage area in a State, the second 
 marginal rate exceeds the final marginal rate, the 
 State may adjust such marginal rates as provided in 
 subparagraph (B).
 (B) Same rate applicable.--Under an adjustment made 
 by a State under subparagraph (A), the second marginal 
 rate and the final marginal rate shall be the same and 
 shall be the ratio of--
 (i) the amount by which (I) the amount of 
 the repayment amount described in section 
 6111(a) exceeds (II) 4 percent of the 
 applicable poverty level (for the class and 
 year); to
 (ii) 200 percent of such poverty level.
 (4) Monthly application to afdc and ssi families.--
 Paragraph (1) insofar as it relates to an AFDC or SSI family 
 shall be applied so as to reduce to zero the liability amount 
 only for months in which the family is such an AFDC or SSI 
 family.
 (d) Wage-Adjusted Income Defined.--In this subtitle, the term 
``wage-adjusted income'' means, for a family, family adjusted income of 
the family (as defined in section 1282), reduced by the sum of the 
following:
 (1)(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), the amount of any wages 
 included in such family's income that is received for 
 employment which is taken into account in the computation of 
 the amount of employer premiums under section 6121 (without 
 consideration of section 6126).
 (B) The reduction under subparagraph (A) shall not exceed 
 for a year $5,000 (adjusted under section 6104(c)(3)(B)) 
 multiplied by the number of months (including portions of 
 months) of employment with respect to which employer premiums 
 were payable under section 6121 (determined in a manner 
 consistent with section 1901(b)(3)).
 (2) The amount of net earnings from self employment of the 
 family taken into account under section 6126.
 (3) The amount of unemployment compensation included in 
 income under section 85 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (e) Determinations.--A family's wage-adjusted income and the amount 
of liability under subsection (c) shall be determined by the applicable 
health care coverage area upon application by a family under subpart B 
of part 3 of subtitle D of title I.
 (f) No Liability for Indians and Certain Veterans and Military 
Personnel.--The provisions of paragraph (3) of section 6104(a) shall 
apply to the reduction in liability under this section in the same 
manner as such paragraph applies to the premium discount under section 
6104.

SEC. 6113. PAYMENTS BY NONQUALIFYING EMPLOYEES.

 (a) In General.--In the case of an eligible family described in 
paragraph (b), the net liability of the family under this section shall 
be the amount described in subsection (c), limited by the amount 
described in subsection (d) plus the amount described in subsection 
(e).
 (b) Eligible Family Described.--The family described in this 
paragraph is a family that has one or more nonqualifying employees and 
has no full-time qualifying employees. The Board shall develop rules 
for applying this section to families whose employment status with 
respect to exempt employers changes during the year.
 (c) Amount.--The amount described in this subsection is the sum 
of--
 (1) the family share as defined in section 6101 (including 
 any discounts under 6104); and
 (2) the family credit repayment amount described in subpart 
 B of title VI (including any reductions under section 6113); 
 reduced by--
 (3) the amount (if any) by which that the premium specified 
 in 6102(a) with respect to such family exceeds the weighted 
 average premium (applicable to the family).
 (d) Limit.--The limit described in this subsection is the 
following:
 (1) for a family with family adjusted income of less than 
 150 percent of the applicable poverty level, 4 percent of 
 family adjusted income;
 (2) for a family with family adjusted income of at least 
 150 percent but less than 175 percent of the applicable poverty 
 level, 4.5 percent of family adjusted income;
 (3) for a family with family adjusted income of at least 
 175 percent but less than 225 percent of the applicable poverty 
 level, 5 percent of family adjusted income; and
 (4) for a family with family adjusted income of at least 
 225 percent but less than 400 percent of the applicable poverty 
 level, 6 percent of family adjusted income.
 (e) The amount described in this subsection is the amount in 
subsection (c)(3).
 (f) Indexing of Percentages.--
 (1) In general.--The percentage of family adjusted income 
 specified in paragraphs (1) through (4) of subsection (d) shall 
 be adjusted for any year after 1994 so that the percentage for 
 the year bears the same ratio to the percentage so specified as 
 the ratio of--
 (A) 1 plus the general health care inflation factor 
 (as defined in section 6001(a)(3)) for the year, bears 
 to
 (B) 1 plus the percentage specified in section 1135 
 (relating to indexing of dollar amounts related to cost 
 sharing) for the year.
 (2) Rounding.--Any adjustment under paragraph (1) for a 
 year shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of 1/10 of 1 
 percentage point.

SEC. 6114. SPECIAL TREATMENT OF CERTAIN RETIREES AND QUALIFIED SPOUSES 
 AND CHILDREN.

 (a) Treatment as Full-Time Employee.--Subject to subsection (d), an 
individual who is an eligible retiree (as defined in subsection (b)) or 
a qualified spouse or child (as defined in subsection (c)) for a month 
in a year (beginning with 1998) is considered, for purposes of section 
6112, to be a full-time employee described in such section in such 
month.
 (b) Eligible Retiree Defined.--In this section, the term ``eligible 
retiree'' means, for a month, an individual who establishes to the 
satisfaction of the State (for the health care coverage area in which 
the individual resides), pursuant to rules of the Secretary, that the 
individual, as of the first day of the month--
 (1) is at least 55, but less than 65, years of age,
 (2) is not employed on a full-time basis (as defined in 
 section 1901(b)(2)(A)),
 (3) would be eligible (under section 226(a) of the Social 
 Security Act) for hospital insurance benefits under part A of 
 title XVIII of such Act if the individual were 65 years of age 
 based only on the employment of the individual, or has 
 completed 40 quarters of employment through a State or local 
 government, or has completed 40 quarters of employment through 
 a State or local government, and
 (4) is not a medicare-eligible individual.
 (c) Qualified Spouse or Child Defined.--In subsection (a), the term 
``qualified spouse or child'' means, in relation to an eligible retiree 
for a month, an individual who establishes to the satisfaction of the 
community-rated health plan (for the health care coverage area in which 
the individual resides) under rules of the Secretary that the 
requirements in one of the following paragraphs is met with respect to 
the individual:
 (1) The individual (A) is under 65 years of age and is (and 
 has been for a period of at least one year) married to an 
 eligible retiree or (B) is a child of the eligible retiree.
 (2) In the case of a person who was an eligible retiree at 
 the time of the person's death--
 (A) the individual was (and had for a period of at 
 least one year been) married to the retiree at the time 
 of the person's death,
 (B) the individual is under 65 years of age,
 (C) the individual is not employed on a full-time 
 basis (as defined in section 1901(b)(2)(A)),
 (D) the individual is not remarried, and
 (E) the deceased spouse would still be an eligible 
 retiree in the month if such spouse had not died.
 (3) The individual is a child of an individual described in 
 paragraph (2).
 (d) Application.--An individual may not be determined to be an 
eligible retiree or qualified spouse or child unless an application has 
been filed with the State. Such application shall contain such 
information as the Secretary may require to establish such status and 
verify information in the application. Any material misrepresentation 
in the application is subject to a penalty in the same manner as a 
misrepresentation described in section 1282.

SEC. 6115. SPECIAL TREATMENT OF CERTAIN MEDICARE BENEFICIARIES.

 In the case of an individual who would be a medicare-eligible 
individual in a month but for the application of section 1012(a) on the 
basis of employment (in the month or a previous month) of the 
individual or the individual's spouse or parent, the individual (or 
spouse or parent, as the case may be) so employed is considered, for 
purposes of section 6112, to be a full-time employee described in such 
section in such month.

 PART 2--EMPLOYER PREMIUM PAYMENTS

 Subpart A--Employers Exempt From Coverage Obligations

SEC. 6116. EXEMPTION FROM COVERAGE OBLIGATIONS.

 An exempt employer as defined section 6117 shall be exempt from 
requirements described in this part, except the requirement described 
in section 6120, unless the employer elects under section 6118 to be 
treated as a community-rated employer.

SEC. 6117. EXEMPT EMPLOYER DEFINED.

 (a) In General.--In this section--
 (1) the term ``exempt employer'' means an employer that 
 does not employ, on average, more than 10 full-time equivalent 
 employees;
 (2) and is an employer with average annual wages per full-
 time equivalent employee of less than $24,000; and
 (3) the average number of full-time equivalent employees 
 shall be determined by averaging the number of full-time 
 equivalent employees employed by the employer in each countable 
 month during the year.
 (b) Countable Month.--In paragraph (1), the term ``countable 
month'' means, for an employer, a month in which the employer employs 
any qualifying employee.
 (c) Determinations.--The number of full-time equivalent employees 
shall be determined using the rules under section 1901(b)(2).
 (d) Exempt Employer.--The term ``exempt employer'' shall not 
include an individual described in section 6126(c)(2).

SEC. 6118. ELECTION.

 A exempt employer may elect to be treated as a community-rated 
employer under the procedures described in section.

SEC. 6119. TREATMENT OF EXEMPT EMPLOYERS.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Community rated employer.--An exempt employer shall be 
 treated as a community rated employer as of the first date of 
 the first year following an election made under section 6118.
 (2) Eligibility for discounts.--An exempt employer making 
 an election under section 6118 shall be eligible for discounts 
 under 6123.

SEC. 6120. NONELECTING EXEMPT EMPLOYER.

 (a) In General.--The term ``nonelecting exempt employer'' means an 
exempt employer that has not made an election under section 6118.
 (b) Assessment in Lieu of Participation.--Each State shall 
establish a mechanism to collect an assessment of payroll from each 
non-electing employer to be used to defray the cost of subsidies to the 
employees of such employer.
 (c) Amount of Assessment.--For purposes of subsection (b)--
 (1) with respect to employers with 5 or fewer full-time 
 equivalent employees, the assessment of payroll under such 
 subsection shall be 1 percent; and
 (2) with respect to employers with more than 6 but less 
 than 11 full-time equivalent employees, the assessment of 
 payroll under such subsection shall be 2 percent.

 Subpart B--Community-Rated Employers

SEC. 6121. EMPLOYER PREMIUM PAYMENT REQUIRED.

 (a) Requirement.--
 (1) In general.--Each community-rated employer described in 
 paragraph (2) for a month shall pay at least an amount equal to 
 the sum across all qualifying employees of the amount specified 
 in subsection (b) for each such qualifying employee of the 
 employer. Such payments shall be made in accordance with 
 section 1345(c).
 (2) Employer described.--An employer described in this 
 paragraph for a month is an employer that--
 (A) in a month employs one or more qualifying 
 employees (as defined in section 1901(b)(1)); and
 (B) is not exempt under section 3127 of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 from the taxes imposed in 
 section 3111 of such code.
 (3) Treatment of certain employment by experience-rated 
 employers.--An experience-rated employer shall be deemed, for 
 purposes of this subpart, to be a community-rated employer with 
 respect to qualifying employees who are not experience rate 
 eligible individuals.
 (b) Premium Payment Amount.--
 (1) In general.--Except as provided in section 6123 
 (relating to a discount for certain employers), section 6124 
 (relating to large employers electing coverage through 
 community-rated health plans), section 6125 (relating to the 
 employer collection shortfall add-on), and section 6127 
 (relating to qualified worksite health promotion programs, the 
 amount of the employer premium payment, for a month for each 
 qualifying employee of the employer who is residing in a health 
 care coverage area, is the payment amount computed under 
 paragraph (2) with respect to such employee in such area.
 (2) Payment amount for each employee in a class of family 
 enrollment.--Subject to paragraph (4), the payment amount under 
 this paragraph, for an employer for each qualifying employee 
 residing in a health care coverage area, is the product of--
 (A) the base employment monthly premium determined 
 under section 6122 for the applicable class of family 
 enrollment (as defined in paragraph (3)) for the 
 previous month for the health care coverage area, and
 (B) the full-time employment ratio (as defined in 
 section 1901 for the previous month.
 (3) Applicable class of family enrollment.--The applicable 
 class of family enrollment described in this paragraph is the 
 class of family enrollment selected by the qualifying employee.
 (4) Treatment of certain employees.--In applying this 
 subpart in the case of a qualifying employee (other than a 
 medicare-eligible individual) who is not enrolled in any health 
 plan--
 (A) the employee is deemed enrolled in a community-
 rated health plan (for the health care coverage area in 
 which the individual resides) in the dual parent class 
 of enrollment, and
 (B) if the employee's residence is not known, the 
 employee is deemed to reside in the health care 
 coverage area in which the employee principally is 
 employed for the employer.
 (5) Transitional rules for first month in first year for a 
 state.--In the case of an employer for a State in the first 
 month of the State's first year--
 (A) the premium amount for each qualifying employee 
 for such month shall be computed by substituting 
 ``month'' for ``previous month'' in paragraph (2);
 (B) payment for such month shall be made on the 
 first of the month based on an estimate of the payment 
 for such month;
 (C) an adjustment shall be made to the payment in 
 the following month to reflect the difference between 
 the payment in the first month and the payment in the 
 following month (calculated without regard to the 
 adjustment under this subparagraph); and
 (D) the reconciliation of premiums for such first 
 month under section 1602(c) shall be included in the 
 reconciliation of premiums for the following 12 months.
 (6) Special rules for divided families.--In the case of an 
 individual who is a qualifying employee of an employer, if the 
 individual has a spouse or child who is not treated as part of 
 the individual's family because of section 1012--
 (A) the employer premium payment under this section 
 shall be computed as though such section had not 
 applied, and
 (B) the State shall provide for proportional 
 payments (consistent with rules established by the 
 Secretary) to the health plans (if different) of the 
 qualifying employee and of the employee's spouse and 
 children.
 (7) Special rules for certain employees residing abroad.--
 The Office of Personnel Management shall determine the 
 appropriate (voluntary) employer premium amount with respect to 
 each employee described in section 1707 electing to purchase 
 coverage through the FEHBP.
 (c) Application During Transition Period.--
 (1) In general.--For purposes of applying this subpart in 
 the case of an employer described in paragraph (3), there shall 
 only be taken into account qualifying employees (and wages of 
 such employees) who reside in a participating State.
 (2) Exception.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply in 
 determining the average number of full-time equivalent 
 employees or whether an employer is a medium employer.
 (3) Employer described.--An employer described in this 
 paragraph is an employer that employs one or more qualifying 
 employees in a participating State and one or more qualifying 
 employees in a State that is not a participating State.
 (d) Exemption From Premium Payments.--An employer shall be exempt 
from the payment of health care premiums for exempt individuals defined 
in section 1902(19).

SEC. 6122. COMPUTATION OF BASE EMPLOYMENT MONTHLY PREMIUM.

 (a) In General.--Each State shall provide for the computation for 
each year (beginning with the first year) of a base employment monthly 
premium for each class of family enrollment as follows:
 (1) Individual enrollment.--The base employment monthly 
 premium for the individual class of enrollment is equal to \1/
 12\ of 80 percent of the credit-adjusted weighted average 
 premium (as defined in paragraph (4)) for the health care 
 coverage area for the individual class of enrollment.
 (2) Couple-only enrollment.--
 (A) In general.--The base employment monthly 
 premium for the couple-only class of enrollment is 
 equal to \1/12\ of 80 percent of the product described 
 in subparagraph (B), divided by the sum described in 
 subparagraph (C).
 (B) Total premiums for couple-only enrollments.--
 The product described in this subparagraph is--
 (i) the credit-adjusted weighted average 
 premium for such health care coverage area for 
 the couple-only class of enrollment, multiplied 
 by
 (ii) the sum, for all the months in the 
 year, of the number of covered families 
 receiving coverage through community-rated 
 health plans within such class of enrollment in 
 each such month.
 (C) Number of workers and extra workers.--The sum 
 described in this subparagraph is--
 (i) the sum specified in subparagraph 
 (B)(ii), plus
 (ii) the number of additional workers 
 (determined under subsection (b)(1)), for 
 families receiving coverage within such class 
 from community-rated health plans offered for 
 the health care coverage area.
 (3) Single and dual parent enrollments.--
 (A) In general.--The base employment monthly 
 premium for the single parent and dual parent classes 
 of enrollment is equal to \1/12\ of 80 percent of the 
 sum described in subparagraph (B), divided by the sum 
 described in subparagraph (C).
 (B) Total premiums for single and dual parent 
 enrollments.--The sum described in this subparagraph is 
 the sum of the products described in the following 
 clauses:
 (i) Total premiums for single parent 
 enrollment.--The product of--
 (I) the credit-adjusted weighted 
 average premium for the health care 
 coverage area for the single parent 
 class of enrollment, multiplied by
 (II) the sum, for all the months in 
 the year, of the number of covered 
 families receiving coverage through 
 community-rated health plans within 
 such class of enrollment in each such 
 month.
 (ii) Total premiums for dual parent 
 enrollment.--The product of--
 (I) the credit-adjusted weighted 
 average premium for such health care 
 coverage area for the dual parent class 
 of enrollment, multiplied by
 (II) the sum, for all the months in 
 the year, of the number of covered 
 families receiving coverage through 
 community-rated health plans within 
 such class of enrollment in each such 
 month.
 (C) Number of workers and extra workers.--The sum 
 described in this subparagraph is--
 (i) the sum specified in subparagraph 
 (B)(i)(II); plus
 (ii) the sum specified in subparagraph 
 (B)(ii)(II); plus
 (iii) the number of additional workers 
 (determined under subsection (b)(1)), for 
 families receiving coverage within the dual 
 parent class of enrollment from community-rated 
 health plans offered for the health care 
 coverage area.
 (4) Credit-adjusted weighted average premium defined.--In 
 this subsection, the term ``credit-adjusted weighted average 
 premium'' means, for a class of enrollment and a health care 
 coverage area, the weighted average premium for the class and 
 area, reduced by the amount described in section 6106(b) for 
 such class and area.
 (b) Determination of Additional Workers for Couple-Only and Dual 
Parent Class.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (4), the State shall 
 determine, for each couple class of family enrollment and in a 
 manner specified by the Board, an estimated total number of 
 additional workers equal to--
 (A) 12 times the health care coverage area-wide 
 monthly average number of premium payments (as 
 determined under paragraph (2)) for covered families 
 (as defined in paragraph (3)) within such class of 
 enrollment, minus
 (B) the sum described in subsection (a)(2)(B)(ii) 
 or (a)(3)(B)(ii)(II) for the couple-only and dual 
 parent classes, respectively.
 (2) Computation of health care coverage area-wide monthly 
 average number.--
 (A) In general.--In determining the health care 
 coverage area-wide monthly average number of premium 
 payments under paragraph (1)(A), a covered family shall 
 count for a month as 1, or, if greater, the number 
 computed under subparagraph (B) (but in no case greater 
 than 2).
 (B) Counting of families in which both spouses are 
 qualifying employees.--The number computed under this 
 subparagraph over all families within a couple-only or 
 dual parent class of enrollment in which both spouses 
 are qualifying employees is determined on a health care 
 coverage area-wide basis based on the following:
 (i) For such a spouse, determine, using the 
 rules under section 1902 how many full-time 
 equivalent employees the spouse is counted as, 
 but not to exceed 1 for either spouse.
 (ii) Add the 2 numbers determined under 
 clause (i) for spouses in such families.
 (3) Covered family defined.--In this subsection, the term 
 ``covered family'' means a family other than--
 (A) an SSI family or AFDC family,
 (B) a family in which a spouse is a medicare-
 eligible individual, or
 (C) a family that is enrolled in a health plan 
 other than a community-rated health plan.
 (4) Adjustment to account for use of estimates.--Subject to 
 section 9201, if the total receipts of a State for all 
 community-rated health plans in a year under this subpart 
 exceeds, or is less than, the total of such receipts estimated 
 for the State (based on the base employment monthly premium 
 under subsection (a)), because of a difference between--
 (A) the State's estimate of the estimated total 
 number of additional workers for the State and the 
 estimate of the number of covered families, and
 (B) the actual total number of additional workers 
 and the actual number of covered families,
 the estimated total number of additional workers to be applied 
 under this section in the second succeeding year shall be 
 reduced, or increased, respectively, in a manner that results 
 in total receipts of the State under this subpart in such 
 succeeding year being increased or decreased by the amount of 
 such excess (or deficit).
 (c) Basis for Determinations.--
 (1) Premiums.--The determinations of premiums and families 
 under plans under this section shall be made in a manner 
 determined by the Board and based on the premiums and families 
 used by the Board in carrying out subtitle A and shall be based 
 on estimates on an annualized basis.
 (2) Employment.--The determinations of employment under 
 this section for the first year for a State shall be based on 
 estimates of employment established by the State in accordance 
 with standards promulgated by the Secretary of Labor in 
 consultation with the National Health Board.
 (3) Reports.--In accordance with rules established by the 
 Secretary of Labor in consultation with the National Health 
 Board, the State may require large group purchaser employers to 
 submit such periodic information on employment as may be 
 necessary to monitor the determinations made under this 
 section, including months and extent of employment.
 (d) Timing of Determination.--Determinations under this section for 
a year shall be made by not later than December 1, or such other date 
as the Board may specify, before the beginning of the year.

SEC. 6123. PREMIUM DISCOUNT FOR CERTAIN EMPLOYERS.

 (a) Employer Discount.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to section 6124(c) and section 
 6125 (relating to the employer collection shortfall add-on), 
 the amount of the employer premium payment required under 
 section 6121(b) for a community-rated employer for any year for 
 a qualifying employee shall not exceed the limiting percentage 
 (as defined in subsection (b)) of such qualifying employee's 
 wages for that year.
 (2) Exclusion of federal government employers.--Paragraph 
 (1) shall not apply to the Federal Government.
 (b) Limiting Percentage Defined.--In subsection (a)--
 (1) Any employer.--For an employer that is not a medium-
 sized employer (as defined in subsection (c)) or an exempt 
 employer (as defined in subsection 6117), the limiting 
 percentage is 12 percent.
 (2) Medium-sized employers.--For an employer that is a 
 medium-sized employer and that has an average number of full-
 time equivalent employees and average annual wages per full-
 time equivalent employee (as determined under subsection (d)), 
 the limiting percentage is the applicable percentage determined 
 based on following table:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Average number of 
full-time equivalent $0-$12,000 $12,001-$15,000 $15,001-$18,000 $18,001-$21,000 $21,001-$24,000 $24,001 or
 employees more 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fewer than 15....... 4.2% 5.5% 6.8% 8.1% 9.4% 12% 
15 but fewer than 25 5.5% 6.8% 8.1% 9.4% 10.7% 12% 
25 but fewer than 50 6.8% 8.1% 9.4% 10.7% 12% 12% 
50 but not over 75.. 8.1% 9.4% 10.7% 12% 12% 12% 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 (3) Small employers.--For an employer that is an exempt 
 employer and elects to be a community-rated employer (in 
 accordance of section 6119), the limiting percentage is the 
 limiting percentage described in paragraph (2).
 (4) Experience-rated employers.--The value of discounts 
 provided to an experience-rated employer shall not exceed the 
 amount that the employer would receive if the employer was 
 treated as a community-rated employer.
 (c) Medium-sized Employer Defined.--
 (1) In general.--In this section--
 (A) the term ``medium sized employer'' means an 
 employer that does not employ, on average, less than 11 
 full-time equivalent employees or more than 75 full-
 time equivalent employees; and
 (B) the average number of full-time equivalent 
 employees shall be determined by averaging the number 
 of full-time equivalent employees employed by the 
 employer in each countable month during the year.
 (2) Countable month.--In paragraph (1), the term 
 ``countable month'' means, for an employer, a month in which 
 the employer employs any qualifying employee.
 (3) Determinations.--The number of full-time equivalent 
 employees shall be determined using the rules under section 
 1901(b)(2).
 (d) Average Annual Wages per Full-Time Equivalent Employee 
Defined.--
 (1) In general.--In this section, the term ``average annual 
 wages per full-time equivalent employee'' means, for an 
 employer for a year--
 (A) the total wages paid in the year to individuals 
 who, at the time of payment of the wages, are 
 qualifying employees of the employer; divided by
 (B) the number of full-time equivalent employees of 
 the employer in the year.
 (2) Determination.--The Board may establish rules relating 
 to the computation of the average annual wages for employers.
 (e) Determinations.--For purposes of this section, the number of 
employees and average wages shall be determined on an annual basis.
 (f) Treatment of Certain Self-Employed Individuals.--In the case of 
an individual who is a partner in a partnership, is a 2-percent 
shareholder in an S corporation (within the meaning of section 1372 of 
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986), or is any other individual who 
carries on a trade or business as a sole proprietorship, for purposes 
of this section--
 (1) the individual is deemed to be an employee of the 
 partnership, S corporation, or proprietorship, and
 (2) the individual's net earnings from self employment 
 attributable to the partnership, S corporation, or sole 
 proprietorship are deemed to be wages from the partnership, S 
 corporation, or proprietorship.
 (g) Application to Employers.--An employer that claims that this 
section applies--
 (1) shall provide notice to the State of the claim at the 
 time of making payments under this subpart; and
 (2) shall make available such information (and provide 
 access to such information) as the State may require (in 
 accordance with regulations of the Secretary of Labor) to audit 
 the determination of--
 (A) whether the employer is a medium employer, and, 
 if so, the average number of full-time equivalent 
 employees and average annual wages of the employer; and
 (B) the total wages paid by the employer for 
 qualifying employees.
 (h) Treatment of Multi-Area Employers.--In the case in which this 
section is applied to an employer that makes employer premium payments 
in more than one health care coverage areas, the reduction under this 
section shall be applied in a pro-rated manner to the premium payments 
made to all such areas.

SEC. 6124. PAYMENT ADJUSTMENT FOR CERTAIN LARGE EMPLOYERS.

 (a) Application of Section.--Except as otherwise provided in this 
subsection, this section shall apply to the employers described in 
section 6133.
 (b) Additional Amount.--
 (1) In general.--If an employer subject to this section for 
 a year has an excess risk proportion (specified in paragraph 
 (3)) of greater than zero with respect to a health care 
 coverage area, then the employer shall provide, on a monthly 
 basis, for payment to the premium clearinghouse for such area 
 of an amount equal to \1/12\ of the excess risk amount 
 described in paragraph (2) for the year.
 (2) Excess risk amount.--The excess risk amount described 
 in this paragraph, for an employer for a year with respect to a 
 health care coverage area, is equal to the product of the 
 following:
 (A) The final weighted average per capita premium 
 rate for the area for the year.
 (B) The total average number of community-rate 
 eligible individuals who--
 (i) are full-time employees (or family 
 members of such employees) of the employer, and
 (ii) residing in the area,
 in the year.
 (C) The excess risk proportion (specified in 
 paragraph (3)) for the employer for such area.
 (3) Excess risk proportion.--
 (A) In general.--The ``excess risk proportion'', 
 specified in this paragraph, with respect to an 
 employer and a health care coverage area, is a 
 percentage that reflects, for the year involved, the 
 amount by which--
 (i) the average demographic risk for 
 employees (and family members) described in 
 paragraph (2)(B) residing in the area, exceeds
 (ii) the average demographic risk for all 
 community-rate eligible individuals residing in 
 the area.
 (B) Measurement of demographic risk.--
 (i) In general.--Demographic risk under 
 subparagraph (A) shall be measured, in a manner 
 specified by the Board, based on the 
 demographic characteristics described in 
 section 6001(c)(1)(A), that relate to the 
 actuarial value of the comprehensive benefit 
 package.
 (ii) Provision of information.--Each 
 employer to which this section applies shall 
 submit, to each State for which an additional 
 payment may be required under this section, 
 such information (and at such time) as the 
 Board may require in order to determine the 
 demographic risk referred to in subparagraph 
 (A)(i).

SEC. 6125. EMPLOYER COLLECTION SHORTFALL ADD-ON.

 (a) In General.--The amount payable by an employer under this 
subpart shall be increased by the amount computed under subsection (b).
 (b) Amount.--The amount under this subsection for an employer is 
equal to the premium payment amount that would be payable under section 
6121(a) if the per capita collection shortfall amount (computed under 
section 6107(b)(1)) for the year were substituted for the weighted 
average discount rate for the year. The weighted average discount rate 
is used under section 6000(b)(1) in computing the weighted average 
premium, which in turn is used under section 6122(a)(1) in computing 
the base employment monthly premium, which in turn is used under 
section 6121(b)(2)(A) in computing the employer premium amount.
 (c) Discount Not Applicable.--Section 6123 shall not apply to the 
increase in the amount payable by virtue of this section.

SEC. 6126. APPLICATION TO SELF-EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS.

 (a) In General.--A self-employed individual (as defined in section 
1901(c)(2)) shall be considered, for purposes of this subpart to be an 
employer of himself or herself and to pay wages to himself or herself 
equal to the amount of net earnings from self-employment (as defined in 
section 1901(c)(1)).
 (b) Credit for Employer Premiums.--
 (1) In general.--In the case of a self-employed individual, 
 the amount of any employer premium payable by virtue of 
 subsection (a) in a year shall be reduced (but not below zero) 
 by the sum of the following:
 (A) Subject to paragraph (2), the amount of any 
 employer premiums payable under this subpart 
 (determined not taking into account any adjustment in 
 the premium amounts under section 6123 or 6124) with 
 respect to the employment of that individual in the 
 year.
 (B) The product of (i) the number of months in the 
 year the individual was employed on a full-time basis 
 by a experience-rated employer, and (ii) the employer 
 premium that would have been payable for such months 
 under this subpart (determined not taking into account 
 any adjustment in the premium amounts under section 
 6123 or 6124) for the class of enrollment if such 
 employer had been a community-rated employer.
 (c) Special Rule for Certain Self-Employed Individuals.--
 (1) In general.--In the case of certain self-employed 
 individuals described in paragraph (2), the payment obligation 
 under this section shall be limited to the liability described 
 in subsection (c) of section 6113 (substituting the amount of 
 net earnings from self employment (defined in section 
 1901(c)(1)) of such individual for wage adjusted income).
 (2) Self-employed individuals.--The individuals described 
 in this paragraph are self-employed individuals (as defined in 
 section 1901(c)(2)) for a year who are not employers with 
 respect to other qualifying employees in such year.
 (3) Special rule for certain closely-held businesses.--
 (A) In general.--In the case of an individual who--
 (i) has wage-adjusted income (as defined in 
 section 6113(d), determined without regard to 
 paragraphs (1)(B) and (2) thereof) that exceeds 
 300 percent (or such higher percentage as the 
 Board may establish) of the applicable poverty 
 level, and
 (ii) is both a substantial owner and an 
 employee of a closely held business,
 the amount of any reduction under paragraph (1)(A) that 
 is attributable to the individual's employment by that 
 business shall be appropriately reduced in accordance 
 with rules prescribed by the Board, in order to prevent 
 individuals from avoiding payment of the full amount 
 owed through fraudulent or secondary employment 
 arrangements.
 (B) Closely held business.--For purposes of 
 subparagraph (A), a business is ``closely held'' if it 
 is an employer that meets the requirements of section 
 542(a)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 or 
 similar requirements as appropriate in the case of a 
 partnership or other entity.

 Subpart C--Large Group Purchasers

SEC. 6131. LARGE EMPLOYER PREMIUM PAYMENT REQUIRED.

 (a) Per Employee Premium Payment.--Subject to section 6124, each 
experience-rated employer of a large group purchaser that in a month in 
a year employs a qualifying employee who is--
 (1) enrolled in an experience-rated health plan offered by 
 the purchaser, shall provide for a payment toward the premium 
 for the plan for such employee in an amount at least equal to 
 the large group employer premium payment specified in 
 subsection (b); or
 (2) is not so enrolled, shall make employer premium 
 payments with respect to such employment under subpart B in the 
 same manner as if the employer were a community-rated employer 
 (except as otherwise provided in such subpart).
 (b) Large Group Employer Premium.--
 (1) Amount.--
 (A) In general.--The amount of the large employer 
 premium payment for a month in a year for a class of 
 family enrollment for a family residing in a premium 
 area (established under section 1404(e)) is 80 percent 
 of the weighted average monthly premium of the 
 experience-rated health plans offered by the large 
 group purchaser for that class of enrollment for 
 families residing in that area.
 (B) Application to self-insured plans.--In applying 
 this paragraph in the case of one or more experience-
 rated health plans that are self-insured plans--
 (i) the ``premium'' for the plan is the 
 actuarial equivalent of such premium, based 
 upon the methodology (or such other consistent 
 methodology) used under section 6021(a) 
 (relating to application of premium caps to 
 experience-rated health plans), and
 (ii) the premium amount, for different 
 classes and, if applicable, for different 
 premium areas, shall be computed in a manner 
 based on such factors as may bear a reasonable 
 relationship to costs for the provision of the 
 comprehensive benefit package to the different 
 classes in such areas.
 The Secretary of Labor shall establish rules to carry 
 out this subparagraph.
 (2) Low-wage employees.--In the case of a low-wage employee 
 entitled to a premium discount under section 6104(a)(2), the 
 amount of the employer premium payment for a month in a year 
 for a class of family enrollment shall be increased by the 
 amount of such premium discount.
 (c) Determinations.--
 (1) Basis.--Determinations under this section shall be made 
 based on such information as the Secretary of Labor shall 
 specify.
 (2) Timing.--Determinations of the monthly premiums under 
 this section for months in a year shall be made not later than 
 December 1 of the previous year.
 (d) Exemption From Premium Payments.--An employer shall be exempt 
from the payment of health care premiums for exempt individuals defined 
in section 1902(16).

SEC. 6132. ASSISTANCE FOR LOW-WAGE FAMILIES.

 (a) In General.--Each large group purchaser shall make an 
additional contribution towards the enrollment in health plans of the 
purchaser by certain low-wage families in accordance with section 
6131(b)(2).
 (b) Reduction in Cost Sharing.--An experience-rated health plan 
shall provide reductions in cost sharing to levels specified in section 
1281 to experience-rated individuals who would be eligible for such 
reductions were they enrolled in a community-rated plan.

SEC. 6133. EXCESS INCREASE IN PREMIUM EQUIVALENT.

 If the Secretary of Labor finds that a large group purchaser (other 
than a large employer) is in violation of the requirements of section 
6022 (relating to prohibition against excess increase in premium 
expenditures), the Secretary shall terminate the sponsorship in 
accordance with such section.

SEC. 6134. COST CONTROL.

 Each large group purchaser shall control covered expenditures in a 
manner that meets the requirements of part 2 of subtitle A of this 
title.

SEC. 6135. COORDINATION OF PAYMENTS.

 In the case of a married couple in which one spouse is a qualifying 
employee of a community-rated plan or another large group purchaser, 
the large group purchaser shall make such payments as are required 
under this Act to the plan in which the family is enrolled pursuant to 
rules issued by the Secretary of Labor.

 Subtitle C--Payments to Health Plans and Miscellaneous Provisions

SEC. 6200. ASSISTANCE TO PLANS.

 States shall be responsible for assisting health plans and 
cooperatives in the collection of premium payments. A State may 
establish administrative systems (including arrangements with private 
entities) to facilitate the collection of premiums from employers and 
families and the distribution of such premiums to health plans, 
consistent with rules promulgated by the Board.

SEC. 6201. COMPUTATION OF BLENDED PLAN PAYMENT AMOUNT.

 (a) In General.--For purposes of section 6203, the payment amount 
for a community-rated health plan in a health care coverage area in a 
year is equal to a blended payment amount reflecting the final accepted 
bid for each plan, the number of enrollees in each premium class, and 
the proportion of AFDC and SSI beneficiaries throughout the health care 
coverage area served by the plan.
 (b) Methodology.--The Board shall establish a methodology by which 
the blended payment amount described in subsection (a) shall be 
computed and applied.
 (c) Applicable Rates.--For purposes of establishing the metholodogy 
described in subsection (b), if a community-rated health plan has more 
than one applicable premium rate (as described in section 6011(d)(2)), 
such health plan shall be treated as a separate health plan with 
respect to each applicable premium rate and the enrollment in each such 
health plan shall be considered to be the number of individuals 
enrolled in the community-rated plan at the applicable premium rate.

SEC. 6203. PAYMENT TO COMMUNITY-RATED HEALTH PLANS.

 (a) Computation of Blended Plan Payment Amount.--For purposes of 
making payment adjustments to plans under this section, a State shall 
compute, under section 6201(a), a blended plan payment amount for each 
community-rated health plan for enrollment for a year.
 (b) Amount of Payment to Plans.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to subsection (d) and section 
 6121(b)(5)(B), a State shall provide for payment to each 
 community-rated health plan, in which a community-rated 
 individual or family is enrolled, an amount equal to the net 
 blended payment amount (described in paragraph (2)), adjusted 
 (consistent with subsection (c)) to take into account the 
 relative actuarial risk associated with the coverage with 
 respect to the individual or family.
 (2) Net blended payment amount.--The net blended payment 
 amount described in this paragraph is the blended plan payment 
 amount (determined under section 6201(a)), reduced by--
 (A) such amount multiplied by the sum of--
 (i) the administrative allowance 
 percentage, computed under section 1213, and
 (ii) 1.5 percentage points,
 (B) any plan payment reduction imposed under 
 section 6011 for the plan for the year.
 (c) Application of Risk Adjustment and Reinsurance Methodology.--A 
State shall use the reinsurance and risk adjustment methodology 
developed under section 1641 in making payments to health plans under 
this section, except as provided in section 1642.
 (d) Treatment of Veterans, Military, and Indian Health Plans and 
Programs.--
 (1) Veterans health plan.--In applying this subtitle (and 
 title VI) in the case of a community-rated health plan that is 
 a veterans health plan of the Department of Veterans Affairs, 
 the following rules apply:
 (A) For purposes of applying subtitle A of title 
 VI, families enrolled under the plan shall not be taken 
 into account.
 (B) The provisions of subtitle A of title VI shall 
 not apply to the plan, other than such provisions as 
 require the plan to submit a per capita amount for each 
 health care coverage area on a timely basis, which 
 amount shall be treated as the final accepted bid of 
 the plan for the area for purposes of subtitle B of 
 such title and this subtitle. This amount shall not be 
 subject to negotiation and not subject to reduction 
 under section 6011.
 (C) For purposes of computing the blended plan per 
 capita payment amount under section 6201(a), the AFDC 
 and SSI proportions (under section 6202(a)) are deemed 
 to be 0 percent.
 (2) Uniformed services health plan.--In applying this 
 subtitle (and title VI) in the case of a community-rated health 
 plan that is a Uniformed Services Health Plan of the Department 
 of Defense, the following rules apply:
 (A) For purposes of applying subtitle A of title 
 VI, families enrolled under the plan shall not be taken 
 into account.
 (B) The provisions of subtitle A of title VI shall 
 not apply to the plan, other than such provisions as 
 require the plan to submit a per capita amount on a 
 timely basis, which amount shall be treated as the 
 final accepted bid of the plan for the area involved 
 for purposes of subtitle B of such title and this 
 subtitle. This amount shall not be subject to 
 negotiation and not subject to reduction under section 
 6011. The Board, in consultation with the Secretary of 
 Defense, shall establish rules relating to the area (or 
 areas) in which such a bid shall apply.
 (C) For purposes of computing the blended plan per 
 capita payment amount under section 6201(a), the AFDC 
 and SSI proportions (under section 6202(a)) are deemed 
 to be 0 percent.
 (3) Indian health programs.--In applying this subtitle (and 
 title VI) in the case of a health program of the Indian Health 
 Service, the following rules apply:
 (A) Except as provided in this paragraph, the plan 
 shall not be considered or treated to be a community-
 rated health plan and for purposes of applying title 
 VI, families enrolled under the program shall not be 
 taken into account.
 (B) In accordance with rules established by the 
 Secretary, States (or contracting entities under 
 section 1252, at the election of the State) shall act 
 as agents for the collection of employer premium 
 payments (including payments of large group purchasers) 
 required under subtitle B of title VI with respect to 
 qualifying employees who are enrolled under a health 
 program of the Indian Health Service. The Secretary 
 shall permit States to retain a nominal fee to 
 compensate them for such collection activities. In 
 applying this subparagraph, the family share of premium 
 for such employees is deemed to be zero for electing 
 Indians (as defined in section 1012(d)(3)) and for 
 other employees is the amount of the premium 
 established under section 8306(b)(4)(A), employees are 
 deemed to be residing in the area of residence (or area 
 of employment), as specified under rules of the 
 Secretary, and the class of enrollment shall be such 
 class (or classes) as specified under rules of the 
 Secretary.

SEC. 6204. CALCULATION AND PUBLICATION OF GENERAL FAMILY SHARE AND 
 GENERAL EMPLOYER PREMIUM AMOUNTS.

 (a) Family Share.--Each State shall compute and publish the 
following components of the general family share of premiums for each 
health care coverage area designated by the State:
 (1) Plan premiums.--For each plan offered, the applicable 
 premiums for such plan for each class of family enrollment 
 (including the amount of any family collection shortfall).
 (2) Qualified worksite health promotion.--For each plan 
 offered, the premium discount for each level of qualified 
 worksite health promotion program.
 (3) Family credit.--The family credit amount for each class 
 of family enrollment, under section 6103.
 (4) Excess premium credit.--The amount of any excess 
 premium credit provided under section 6105 for each class of 
 family enrollment.
 (5) Large group purchaser opt-in credit.--The amount of any 
 large group purchaser opt-in credit provided under section 6106 
 for each class of family enrollment.
 (b) Employer Premiums.--Each State shall compute and publish the 
following components of the general employer premium payment amount for 
each health care coverage area designated by the State:
 (1) Base employer monthly premium per worker.--The base 
 employer monthly premium determined under section 6122 for each 
 class of family enrollment.
 (2) Qualified worksite health promotion.--The base monthly 
 premium discount for each level of qualified worksite health 
 promotion program.
 (3) Employer collection shortfall add-on.--The employer 
 collection shortfall add-on computed under section 6125(b).
 (e) Reconciliation of Family Share.--
 (1) In general.--Each State shall provide for the 
 reconciliation of family payments in cases where the State 
 determines that there has been an overpayment or underpayment 
 by or on the behalf of such families in accordance with rules 
 promulgated by the Board.
 (2) Provisions.--In carrying out paragraph (1), a State 
 shall provide notice of amounts owed or due to such families, 
 distribute information on the availability of premium discounts 
 and reductions to such families and include income 
 reconciliation forms for families that are provided with 
 premium discounts.
 (3) Notice of amount owed.--If a State determines that a 
 family has paid any family share required under section 6101 
 and is not required to repay any amount under section 6111 for 
 a year, the State shall provide notice of such determination to 
 the family. Such notice shall include a prominent statement 
 that the family is not required to make any additional payment 
 and is not required to file any additional information with the 
 State.
 (4) Coordination of payments for families that have changed 
 residence over the year.--The State in which the community-
 rated plan in which a family is enrolled in December of each 
 year (in this section referred to as the ``final State'') is 
 responsible for the collection of any amounts owed by the 
 family under this subpart, without regard to whether the family 
 resided in the State during the entire year in accordance with 
 rules promulgated by the Board.

SEC. 6205. ADJUSTMENT OF PAYMENTS TO HEALTH PLANS.

 (a) In General.--States shall develop and implement payment 
adjustment mechanisms and collect such information as may be necessary 
for ensuring that payments to health plans are appropriate and 
sufficient.
 (b) Adjustments.--Mechanisms under subsection (a) shall include 
methods for risk adjustment and reinsurance (in accordance with section 
1641 and 1642), the payment of premium discounts (in accordance with 
subtitle B of title VI), payment adjustments to reflect each area's 
share of AFDC and SSI beneficiaries (in accordance with subtitle C of 
title VI), and other adjustments necessary to reconcile the amounts 
collected by plans with the amounts plans are owed.

SEC. 6206. EMPLOYER PAYMENT REQUIREMENT.

 (a) In General.--Each employer shall provide for payments required 
under section 6121 or 6131 in accordance with the applicable provisions 
of this Act.
 (b) Employers in Single-Payer States.--In the case of an employer 
with respect to employees who reside in a single-payer State, the 
responsibilities of such employer under such system shall supersede the 
obligations of the employer under subsection (a), except as the Board 
may provide.
 (c) Employers Participating Multiemployer Plan.--In the case of an 
employer participating in a multiemployer plan, which plan elects to 
serve as a community-rated employer on behalf of its participating 
employers, the employer's payment obligation under section 6121 shall 
be deemed satisfied if the employer pays to the multiemployer plan at 
least the premium payment amount specified in section 6121(b) and the 
plan has assumed legal obligations of such an employer under such 
section.

SEC. 6207. REQUIREMENT FOR EMPLOYER PAYMENT AND RECONCILIATION 
 REPORTING.

 (a) Reporting of End-of-Year Information to Qualifying Employees.--
 (1) In general.--Each employer shall provide with respect 
 to each individual who was a qualifying employee of the 
 employer during any month in the previous year information 
 described in paragraph (2) with respect to the employee.
 (2) Information to be supplied.--The information described 
 in this paragraph, with respect to a qualifying employee, is 
 the following (as specified by the Secretary):
 (A) Health care coverage area information.----With 
 respect to each health care coverage area (or other 
 appropriate area with respect to a large group 
 purchaser) through which the individual obtained health 
 coverage:
 (i) The total number of months of full-time 
 equivalent employment (as determined under 
 section 1901(b)(2)) for each class of 
 enrollment.
 (ii) The amount of wages attributable to 
 qualified employment and the amount of covered 
 wages (as defined in paragraph (4)).
 (iii) The total amount deducted from wages 
 and paid for the family share of the premium.
 (iv) Such other information as the 
 Secretary of Labor may specify.
 (b) Reporting of Information for Use of States.--Each employer 
(including experience-rated employers) shall provide, in accordance 
with section 1604(e)(4), the following information.
 (1) Annual basis.--The information described in this 
 paragraph, with respect to an employer, is the following (as 
 specified by the Secretary of Labor):
 (A) Health care coverage area information.--With 
 respect to each health care coverage area to which 
 employer premium payments were payable in the year:
 (i) For each qualifying employee in the 
 year--
 (I) The total number of months of 
 full-time equivalent employment (as 
 determined under section 1901(b)(2)) 
 for the employee for each class of 
 enrollment.
 (II) The total amount deducted from 
 wages and paid for the family share of 
 the premium of the qualifying employee.
 (ii) The total employer premium payment 
 made under section 6121 for the year with 
 respect to the employment of all qualifying 
 employees residing in the coverage area and, in 
 the case of an employer that has obtained (or 
 seeks to obtain) a premium discount under 
 section 6123, the total employer premium 
 payment that would have been owed for such 
 employment for the year but for such section.
 (iii) The number of full-time equivalent 
 employees (determined under section 1901(b)(2)) 
 for each class of family enrollment in the year 
 (and for each month in the year in the case of 
 an employer that has obtained or is seeking a 
 premium discount under section 6123).
 (iv) In the case of an employer to which 
 section 6124 applies in a year, such additional 
 information as the Secretary of Labor may 
 require for purposes of that section.
 (v) The amounts paid (and payable) pursuant 
 to section 6125.
 (vi) The amount of covered wages for each 
 qualifying employee.
 (2) Monthly basis.--
 (A) In general.--The information described in this 
 paragraph for a month for an employer is such 
 information as the Secretary of Labor may specify 
 regarding--
 (i) the identity of each eligible 
 individual who changed qualifying employee 
 status with respect to the employer in the 
 month; and
 (ii) in the case of such an individual 
 described in subparagraph (B)(i)--
 (I) the consumer purchasing 
 cooperative for the area in which the 
 individual resides, and
 (II) the individual's class of 
 family enrollment.
 (B) Changes in qualifying employee status 
 described.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), an 
 individual is considered to have changed qualifying 
 employee status in a month if the individual either (i) 
 is a qualifying employee of the employer in the month 
 and was not a qualifying employee of the employer in 
 the previous month, or (ii) is not a qualifying 
 employee of the employer in the month but was a 
 qualifying employee of the employer in the previous 
 month.
 (3) Initial information.--Each employer, at such time 
 before the first year in which qualifying employees of the 
 employer are enrolled in community-rated health plans as the 
 Board may specify, shall provide for the reporting of such 
 information relating to employment of eligible individuals as 
 the Board may specify.
 (c) Reconciliation of Employer Premium Payments.--
 (1) Provision of information.--Each employer (whether or 
 not the employer claimed (or claims) an employer premium 
 discount under section 6123 for a year) that is liable for 
 employer premium payments for any month in a year shall provide 
 such information as may be required (consistent with rules of 
 the Secretary of Labor) to determine the appropriate amount of 
 employer premium payments that should have been made for all 
 months in the year (taking into account any employer premium 
 discount under section 6123 for the employer). Such 
 reconciliation process shall be conducted by the State (with 
 respect to community-rated employers) and by the Secretary of 
 Labor (with respect to experience-rated employers).
 (2) Deadline.--Such information shall be provided not later 
 than the beginning of February of the following year with the 
 payment to be made for that month.
 (3) Reconciliation.--
 (A) Continuing employers.--Based on such 
 information, the employer shall adjust the amount of 
 employer premium payment made in the month in which the 
 information is provided to reflect the amount by which 
 the payments in the previous year were greater or less 
 than the amount of payments that should have been made.
 (B) Discontinuing employers.--In the case of a 
 person that ceases to be an employer in a year, such 
 adjustment shall be made in the form of a payment to, 
 or from, the State involved.
 (4) Special treatment of self-employed individuals.--Except 
 as the Secretary of Labor may provide, individuals who are 
 employers only by virtue of the operation of section 6126 shall 
 have employer premium payments attributable to such section 
 reconciled (in the manner previously described in this 
 subsection) under the process for the collection of the family 
 share of premiums under section 6204 rather than under this 
 subsection.
 (d) Notice to Certain Individuals Who Are Not Employees.--
 (1) In general.--A person that carries on a trade or 
 business shall notify in writing each individual described in 
 paragraph (2) that the person is not obligated to make any 
 employer health care premium payment (under section 6121) in 
 relation to the services performed by the individual for the 
 person.
 (2) Individual described.--An individual described in this 
 paragraph, with respect to a person, is an individual who 
 normally performs services for the person in the person's trade 
 or business for more than 40 hours per month but who is not an 
 employee of the person (within the meaning of section 1901(a)).
 (3) Timing; effective date.--Such notice shall be provided 
 within a reasonable time after the individual begins performing 
 services for the person, except that in no event is such a 
 notice required to be provided with respect to services 
 performed before January 1, 1998.
 (4) Exceptions.--The Secretary shall issue regulations 
 providing exceptions to the notice requirement of paragraph (1) 
 with respect to individuals performing services on an 
 irregular, incidental, or casual basis.
 (5) Model notice.--The Secretary shall publish a model 
 notice that is easily understood by the average reader and that 
 persons may use to satisfy the requirements of paragraph (1).
 (e) Special Rules for Self-Employed.--
 (1) In general.--In the case of an individual who is 
 treated as an employer under section 6126, the individual shall 
 provide, under subsection (f), information described in 
 paragraph (2) with respect to net earnings from self-employment 
 income of the individual in each year.
 (2) Information to be supplied.--The information described 
 in this paragraph, with respect to an individual, is such 
 information as may be necessary to compute the amount payable 
 under section 6131 by virtue of section 6126.
 (f) Deadline.--Information required to be provided by an employer 
for a year under this section--
 (1) to a qualifying employee shall be provided not later 
 than the date the employer is required under law to provide for 
 statements under section 6051 of the Internal Revenue Code of 
 1986 for that year, or
 (2) to a State (through the national health care data 
 network) shall be provided not later than the date by which 
 information is required to be filed with the Secretary pursuant 
 to agreements under section 232 of the Social Security Act for 
 that year.
 (g) Information Clearinghouse Functions.--
 (1) Designation.--The Board shall, through the national 
 health care data network, perform information clearinghouse 
 functions under this section with respect to employers, States, 
 the Federal Government, and consumer purchasing cooperatives.
 (2) Functions.--The functions referred to in paragraph (1) 
 shall include--
 (A) receipt of information submitted by employers 
 under subsection (b),
 (B) from the information received, transmittal of 
 information required to appropriate entities, and
 (C) such other functions as the Board specifies.

SEC. 6208. EQUAL VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTION REQUIREMENT.

 (a) In General.--
 (1) Equal voluntary employer premium payment requirement.--
 (A) Community-rated health plans.--If an employer 
 makes available a voluntary employer premium payment 
 (as defined in subsection (d)) on behalf of a full-time 
 employee (as defined in section 1901(b)(2)(C)) who is 
 enrolled in a community-rated health plan of a health 
 care coverage area in a class of family enrollment, the 
 employer shall make available such a voluntary employer 
 premium payment in the same dollar amount to all 
 qualifying employees (as defined in section 1901(b)(1)) 
 of the employer who are enrolled in any community-rated 
 health plan of the same coverage area in the same class 
 of family enrollment.
 (B) Experience-rated health plans.--If an 
 experience-rated employer makes available a voluntary 
 employer premium payment on behalf of a full-time 
 employee who is enrolled in an experience-rated health 
 plan of a large group purchaser in a class of family 
 enrollment in a premium area, the employer shall make 
 available such a voluntary employer premium payment in 
 the same dollar amount to all qualifying employees of 
 the employer enrolled in any experience-rated health 
 plan of the same purchaser in the same class of family 
 enrollment in the same premium area.
 (C) Treatment of part-time employees.--In applying 
 subparagraphs (A) and (B) in the case of a qualifying 
 employee employed on a part-time basis (within the 
 meaning of section 1901(b)(2)(A)(ii)), the dollar 
 amount shall be equal to the full-time employment ratio 
 (as defined in section 1901(b)(2)(B)) multiplied by the 
 dollar amount otherwise required.
 (2) Limit on voluntary employer premium payments.--
 (A) Community-rated health plans.--An employer may 
 not make available a voluntary employer premium payment 
 on behalf of an employee (enrolled in a community-rated 
 health plan of a health care coverage area in a class 
 of family enrollment) in an amount that exceeds the 
 maximum amount that could be payable as the family 
 share of premium (described in section 6101(b)(2)) for 
 the most expensive community-rated health plan of the 
 same area for the same class of family enrollment.
 (B) Experience-rated health plans.--An employer may 
 not make available a voluntary employer premium payment 
 on behalf of an employee (enrolled in an experience-
 rated health plan of a large group purchaser in a class 
 of family enrollment in a premium area, in an amount 
 that exceeds the maximum amount that could be payable 
 as the family share of premium (described in section 
 6101(b)(3)) for the most expensive experience-rated 
 health plan of the same purchaser for the same class of 
 family enrollment in the same premium area.
 (C) Exclusion of plans without material 
 enrollment.--Subparagraphs (A) and (B) shall not take 
 into account any health plan that does not have 
 material enrollment (as determined in accordance with 
 regulations of the Secretary of Labor).
 (3) Nondiscrimination among plans selected.--An employer 
 may not discriminate in the wages or compensation paid, or 
 other terms or conditions of employment, with respect to an 
 employee based on the health plan (or premium of such a plan) 
 in which the employee is enrolled.
 (b) Rebate Required in Certain Cases.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to subsection (c), if--
 (A) an employer makes available a voluntary 
 employer premium payment on behalf of an employee, and
 (B)(i) the sum of the amount of the applicable 
 family credit (under section 6103) and the voluntary 
 employer premium payment, exceeds (ii) the premium for 
 the plan selected,
 the employer must rebate to the employee an amount equal to the 
 excess described in subparagraph (B).
 (2) Treatment of multiple full-time employment in a 
 family.--In the case of--
 (A) an individual who is an employee of more than 
 one employer, or
 (B) a couple for which both spouses are employees,
 if more than one employer provides for voluntary 
 employer premium payments, the individual or couple may 
 elect to have paragraph (1) applied with respect to all 
 employment.
 (c) Exception for Collective Bargaining Agreement.--Subsections (a) 
and (b) (other than subsection (a)(2)) shall not apply with respect to 
voluntary employer premium payments made pursuant to a bona fide 
collective bargaining agreement.
 (d) Voluntary Employer Premium Payment.--In this section, the term 
``voluntary employer premium payment'' means any payment designed to be 
used exclusively (or primarily) towards the cost of the family share of 
premiums for a health plan. Such term does not include any employer 
premiums required to be paid under part 3 of subtitle B of title VI.

SEC. 6209. PAYMENT ARRANGEMENTS.

 (a) Collection of Family Share.--
 (1) Withholding.--
 (A) In general.--In the case of a family that 
 includes a qualifying employee of an employer, the 
 employer shall deduct from the wages of the qualifying 
 employee (in a manner consistent with any rules of the 
 Secretary of Labor) the amount of the family share of 
 the premium for the plan in which the family is 
 enrolled.
 (B) Multiple employment.--In the case of a family 
 that includes more than one qualifying employee, the 
 family shall choose the employer to which subparagraph 
 (A) will apply.
 (C) Payment.--Amounts withheld under this paragraph 
 shall be maintained in a manner consistent with 
 standards established by the Secretary of Labor and 
 paid in a manner consistent with the payment of 
 employer premiums under subtitle C.
 (D) Satisfaction of liability.--An amount deducted 
 from wages of a qualifying employee by an employer is 
 deemed to have been paid by the employee and to have 
 satisfied the employee's obligation under subsection 
 (a) to the extent of such amount.
 (2) Other methods.--In the case of a family that does not 
 include a qualifying employee, the State shall require payment 
 to be made prospectively. Such payment may be required to be 
 made not less frequently than monthly. The Secretary may issue 
 regulations in order to assure the timely and accurate 
 collection of the family share due.
 (b) Timing and Method of Payment of Employer Premiums.--
 (1) Frequency of payment.--Payment of employer premiums 
 under section 6121 for a month shall be made not less 
 frequently than monthly (or quarterly in the case of such 
 payments made by virtue of section 6126). The Secretary of 
 Labor may establish a method under which employers that pay 
 wages on a weekly or biweekly basis are permitted to make such 
 employer payments on such a weekly or biweekly basis.
 (2) Electronic transfer.--A State may require those 
 employers that have the capacity to make payments by electronic 
 transfer to make payments under this subsection by electronic 
 transfer.

SEC. 6210. ENFORCEMENT OF PREMIUM OBLIGATIONS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary of Labor, in consultation with the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services, shall establish an expedited 
collection process to be implemented in the event of non-payment of 
premiums by an employer or an individual.
 (b) Penalties.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (in the 
case of non-payment by individuals) and the Secretary of Labor (in the 
case of non-payment by employers) may impose appropriate penalties 
including premium surcharges and civil monetary penalties in the amount 
of $5,000, or three times the amount of the liability owed, whichever 
is more, to enforce the collection of amounts established under 
subtitle B of this title.
 (c) Delegation.--The Federal Government may delegate its 
responsibilities under this section to a State, upon agreement by such 
State, if in the judgment of the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
and the Secretary of Labor such State would provide for the effective 
enforcement of premium obligations. Such States may utilize the 
assistance referred to in sections 1673 and 1692 to enforce premium 
payments under this section.

SEC. 6211. DETERMINATION OF UNIFORM PER CAPITA CONVERSION FACTOR.

 Each State, based on direction from the National Health Board, 
shall specify, not later than April 1 of each year (beginning with the 
year prior to the first year) a uniform per capita conversion factor to 
be used under section 6102(a)(2) in converting the accepted bid for 
each plan for the year into the premium for an individual enrollment 
for such plan for the year. SSI or AFDC recipients shall not be 
included for purposes of computing the conversion factor.

SEC. 6212. CERTAIN EMPLOYEES AND EMPLOYERS INELIGIBLE FOR PREMIUM 
 ASSISTANCE.

 An employee described in section 1707, and the employer of such 
employee, shall be considered ineligible for any premium discounts 
under this title or other reductions in cost sharing. Such employee 
shall be required to pay a surcharge to the Office of Personnel 
Management to reflect additional administrative expenses relating to 
the reimbursement of covered services abroad.

 TITLE VIII--HEALTH AND HEALTH-RELATED PROGRAMS OF THE FEDERAL 
 GOVERNMENT

 table of contents of title

 TITLE VIII--HEALTH AND HEALTH-RELATED PROGRAMS OF THE FEDERAL 
 GOVERNMENT

 Subtitle E--Amendments to the Employee Retirement Income Security Act 
 of 1974

Sec. 8401. Group health plan defined.
Sec. 8402. Limitation on coverage of group health plans under title I 
 of ERISA.
Sec. 8403. Revision of Cobra Continuation Coverage Requirements.
Sec. 8404. Additional amendments relating to group health plans.
Sec. 8405. Plan claims procedures.
Sec. 8406. Preemption of Hawaii Prepaid Health Care Act.

 Subtitle E--Amendments to the Employee Retirement Income Security Act 
 of 1974

SEC. 8401. GROUP HEALTH PLAN DEFINED.

 Section 3 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 
(29 U.S.C. 1002) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
paragraph:
 ``(42) The term `group health plan' means an employee welfare 
benefit plan which provides medical care (as defined in section 213(d) 
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) to participants or beneficiaries 
directly or through insurance, reimbursement, or otherwise.''.

SEC. 8402. LIMITATION ON COVERAGE OF GROUP HEALTH PLANS UNDER TITLE I 
 OF ERISA.

 (a) In General.--Section 4 of the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1003) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``subsection (b)'' and 
 inserting ``subsections (b) and (c)'';
 (2) in subsection (b), by striking ``The provisions'' and 
 inserting ``Except as provided in subsection (c), the 
 provisions''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(c) Coverage of Group Health Plans.--
 ``(1) Limited inclusion.--This title shall apply to a group 
 health plan only to the extent provided in this subsection.
 ``(2) Coverage under certain provisions with respect to 
 certain plans.--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (B), parts 1, 4, and 6 of subtitle B shall 
 apply to--
 ``(i) a group health plan which is 
 maintained by--
 ``(I) a large group purchaser (as 
 defined in section 1401(a) of the 
 Health Security Act), or
 ``(II) a member of a large group 
 purchaser (as so defined) whose 
 eligible sponsor is described in 
 section 1401(b)(1)(C) (relating to 
 rural electric cooperatives and rural 
 telephone cooperative associations), 
 and
 ``(ii) a group health plan not described in 
 clause (i) which provides benefits which are 
 permitted under paragraph (4) of section 1003 
 of the Health Security Act.
 ``(B) Supplemental plans.--The Secretary shall 
 provide by regulation for treatment as a separate group 
 health plan of any arrangement which would otherwise be 
 treated under this title as part of a group health plan 
 to the extent necessary to carry out the purposes of 
 this title.
 ``(3) Definitions and enforcement provisions.--Sections 3, 
 501, 502, 503, 504, 505, 506, 507, 508, 509, 510, 511, and 514 
 and the preceding subsections of this section shall apply to a 
 group health plan to the extent necessary to effectively carry 
 out, and enforce the requirements under the provisions of this 
 title as they apply pursuant to this subsection.
 ``(4) Civil actions.--Section 502(a)(1)(B) of this Act 
 (with respect to the cause of action for the recovery of 
 benefits) shall not apply to action by participants, 
 beneficiaries and fiduciaries governed under subtitle C of 
 title V of the Health Security Act.
 ``(5) Applicability of preemption rules.--Section 514 shall 
 apply in the case of any group health plan to which parts 1, 4, 
 and 6 of subtitle B apply under paragraph (2).''.
 (b) State-Certified Plan.--Section 514 of the Employee Retirement 
Income Security Act of 1974 is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)(2)(A), by inserting ``, State-
 certified health plans (as defined in section 1500 of the 
 Health Security Act of 1994),'' after ``insurance''; and
 (2) in subsection (b)(2)(B), by inserting ``, State-
 certified health plan,'' before ``other insurer''.
 (c) Reporting and Disclosure Requirements Applicable to Group 
Health Plans.--
 (1) In general.--Part 1 of subtitle B of title I of such 
 Act is amended--
 (A) in the heading for section 110 (29 U.S.C. 
 1030), by adding ``by pension plans'' at the end;
 (B) by redesignating section 111 (29 U.S.C. 1031) 
 as section 112; and
 (C) by inserting after section 110 the following 
 new section:

 ``special rules for group health plans

 ``Sec. 111. (a) In General.--The Secretary may by regulation 
provide special rules for the application of this part to group health 
plans which are consistent with the purposes of this title and the 
Health Security Act and which take into account the special needs of 
participants, beneficiaries, and health care providers under such 
plans.
 ``(b) Expeditious Reporting and Disclosure.--Such special rules may 
include rules providing for--
 ``(1) reductions in the periods of time referred to in this 
 part,
 ``(2) increases in the frequency of reports and disclosures 
 required under this part, and
 ``(3) such other changes in the provisions of this part as 
 may result in more expeditious reporting and disclosure of plan 
 terms and changes in such terms to the Secretary and to plan 
 participants and beneficiaries,
to the extent that the Secretary determines that the rules described in 
this subsection are necessary to ensure timely reporting and disclosure 
of information consistent with the purposes of this part and the Health 
Security Act as they relate to group health plans.
 ``(c) Additional Requirements.--Such special rules may include 
rules providing for reporting and disclosure to the Secretary and to 
participants and beneficiaries of additional information or at 
additional times with respect to group health plans to which this part 
applies under section 4(c)(2), if such reporting and disclosure would 
be comparable to and consistent with similar requirements applicable 
under the Health Security Act with respect to plans maintained by 
regional alliances (as defined in such section 1301 of such Act) and 
applicable regulations of the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
prescribed thereunder.''.
 (2) Clerical amendment.--The table of contents in section 1 
 of such Act is amended by striking the items relating to 
 sections 110 and 111 and inserting the following new items:

``Sec. 110. Alternative methods of compliance by pension plans.
``Sec. 111. Special rules for group health plans.
``Sec. 112. Repeal and effective date.''.
 (d) Applicability of Certain ERISA Protections to Enrolled 
Individuals.--The provisions of sections 510 (relating to interference 
with rights protected under the Act) and 511 (relating to coercive 
interference) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 
shall apply, in relation to the provisions of this Act, with respect to 
individuals enrolled or eligible to enroll under large group purchaser 
health plans in the same manner and to the same extent as such 
provisions apply, in relation to the provisions of the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, with respect to participants 
and beneficiaries enrolled or eligible to enroll in and under employee 
welfare benefit plans covered by title I of such Act.

SEC. 8403. REVISION OF COBRA CONTINUATION COVERAGE REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) Amendments to the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 
1974.--
 (1) Period of coverage.--Subparagraph (D) of section 
 605(1)(D) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 
 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1161(2)) is amended--
 (A) by striking ``or'' at the end of clause (i), by 
 striking the period at the end of clause (ii) and 
 inserting ``, or'', and by adding at the end the 
 following new clause:
 ``(iii) eligible for coverage under a 
 qualified health plan in accordance with title 
 I of the Health Security Act.'';
 (B) by adding at the end thereof the following:
 ``An individual whose employment has been terminated by 
 an employer offering health plans through a large group 
 purchaser must elect within 30 days of the termination 
 to either remain in the plan provided by the employer 
 for a period of not to exceed 12 months or until the 
 individual is covered under another health plan, 
 whichever is less, or purchase from another plan in the 
 marketplace.''; and
 (C) by striking ``or medicare entitlement'' in the 
 heading and inserting ``, medicare entitlement, or 
 qualified health plan eligibility''.
 (2) Qualified beneficiary.--Section 607(3) of such Act (29 
 U.S.C. 1167(2)) is amended by adding at the end the following 
 new subparagraph:
 ``(D) Special rule for individuals covered by 
 health security act.--The term `qualified beneficiary' 
 shall not include any individual who, upon termination 
 of coverage under a group health plan, is eligible for 
 coverage under a qualified health plan in accordance 
 with title I of the Health Security Act.''
 (3) Repeal upon implementation of act.--
 (A) In general.--Part 6 of subtitle B of title I of 
 such Act (29 U.S.C. 601 et seq.) is amended by striking 
 sections 601 through 608 and by redesignating section 
 609 as section 601.
 (B) Conforming amendments.--
 (i) Section 502(a)(7) of such Act (29 
 U.S.C. 1132(a)(7)) is amended by striking 
 ``609(a)(2)(A)'' and inserting 
 ``601(a)(2)(A)''.
 (ii) Section 502(c)(1) is amended by 
 striking ``paragraph (1) or (4) of section 
 606''.
 (iii) Section 514 of such Act (29 U.S.C. 
 1144) is amended by striking ``609'' each place 
 it appears in subsections (b)(7) and (b)(8) and 
 inserting ``601''.
 (iv) The table of contents in section 1 of 
 such Act is amended by striking the items 
 relating to sections 601 through 609 and 
 inserting the following new item:

``Sec. 601. Additional standards for group health plans.''
 (4) Effective date.--
 (A) Paragraphs (1) and (2).--The amendments made by 
 paragraphs (1) and (2) shall take effect on the date of 
 the enactment of this Act.
 (B) Paragraph (3).--The amendments made by 
 paragraph (3) shall take effect on the first January 1 
 following the full implementation of universal 
 coverage.
 (b) Amendment to Public Health Service Act.--
 (1) Period of coverage.--Subparagraph (D) of section 
 2202(2) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300bb-2(2)) 
 is amended--
 (A) by striking ``or'' at the end of clause (i), by 
 striking the period at the end of clause (ii) and 
 inserting ``, or'', and by adding at the end the 
 following new clause:
 ``(iii) eligible for coverage under a 
 qualified health plan in accordance with title 
 I of the Health Security Act,'', and
 (B) by striking ``or medicare entitlement'' in the 
 heading and inserting ``, medicare entitlement, or 
 qualified health plan eligibility''.
 (2) Qualified beneficiary.--Section 2208(3) of such Act (42 
 U.S.C. 300bb-8(3)) is amended by adding at the end the 
 following new subparagraph:
 ``(C) Special rule for individuals covered by 
 act.--The term `qualified beneficiary' shall not 
 include any individual who, upon termination of 
 coverage under a group health plan, is eligible for 
 coverage under a qualified health plan in accordance 
 with title I of the Health Security Act.''.
 (3) Repeal upon implementation of health security act.--
 (A) In general.--Title XXII of such Act (42 U.S.C. 
 300bb-1 et seq.) is hereby repealed.
 (B) Conforming amendment.--The table of contents of 
 such Act is amended by striking the item relating to 
 title XXII.
 (4) Effective date.--
 (A) Paragraphs (1) and (2).--The amendments made by 
 paragraphs (1) and (2) shall take effect on the date of 
 the enactment of this Act.
 (B) Paragraph (3).--The amendments made by 
 paragraph (3) shall take effect on the first January 1 
 following the full implementation of universal 
 coverage.

SEC. 8404. ADDITIONAL AMENDMENTS RELATING TO GROUP HEALTH PLANS.

 (a) Regulations of the National Health Board Regarding Cases of 
Adoption.--Section 601(c) of the Employee Retirement Income Security 
Act of 1974 (as redesignated by section 8403) is amended by adding at 
the end the following new paragraph:
 ``(4) Regulations by national health board.--The preceding 
 provisions of this subsection shall apply except to the extent 
 otherwise provided in regulations of the National Health Board 
 under the Health Security Act.''.
 (b) Coverage of Pediatric Vaccines.--Section 601(d) of such Act (as 
redesignated by section 8403) is amended by adding at the end the 
following new sentence: ``The preceding sentence shall cease to apply 
to a group health plan upon becoming a large group purchaser health 
plan pursuant to an effective election of the plan sponsor to be a 
large group purchaser under section 1401 of the Health Security Act.''.
 (c) Technical Corrections.--Effective as if included in the 
enactment of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993--
 (1) Subsection (a)(2)(B)(ii) of section 609 of the Employee 
 Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 is amended by striking 
 ``section 13822'' and inserting ``section 13623''.
 (2) Subsection (a)(4) of such section 609 is amended by 
 striking ``section 13822'' and inserting ``section 13623''.
 (3) Subsection (d) of such section 609 is amended by 
 striking ``section 13830'' and inserting ``section 13631''.

SEC. 8405. PLAN CLAIMS PROCEDURES.

 Section 503 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 
(29 U.S.C. 1133) is amended--
 (1) by inserting ``(a) In General.--'' after ``Sec. 503.''; 
 and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(b) Group Health Plans.--In addition to the requirements of 
subsection (a), a group health plan to which parts 1, 4, and 5 apply 
under section 4(c)(2) shall comply with the requirements of section 
5201 of the Health Security Act (relating to health plan claims 
procedure).''.

SEC. 8406. PREEMPTION OF HAWAII PREPAID HEALTH CARE ACT.

 (a) In General.--Section 514(b)(5) of the Employee Retirement 
Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1144(b)(5)) is amended to read 
as follows:
 ``(5)(A) Except as provided in subparagraphs (B) and (C), 
 subsection (a) shall not apply to the Hawaii Prepaid Health 
 Care Act (Haw. Rev. Stat. Sec. Sec. 393-1 through 393-51).
 ``(B) Nothing in subparagraph (A) shall be construed to 
 exempt from subsection (a) any State tax law relating to 
 employee benefits plans.
 ``(C) If the Secretary of Labor notifies the Governor of 
 the State of Hawaii that as the result of an amendment to the 
 Hawaii Prepaid Health Care Act enacted after the date of the 
 enactment of this paragraph--
 ``(i) the proportion of the population with health 
 care coverage under such Act is less than such 
 proportion on such date, or
 ``(ii) the level of benefit coverage provided under 
 such Act is less than the actuarial equivalent of such 
 level of coverage on such date,
 subparagraph (A) shall not apply with respect to the 
 application of such amendment to such Act after the date of 
 such notification.''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall 
take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.

 TITLE IX--AGGREGATE GOVERNMENT PAYMENTS

 table of contents of title

 TITLE IX--AGGREGATE GOVERNMENT PAYMENTS

 Subtitle B--Aggregate Federal Payments to Participating State

Sec. 9100. Capped Federal payments.
 Subtitle C--Borrowing Authority to Cover Cash-flow Shortfalls

Sec. 9200. Borrowing authority to cover cash-flow shortfalls.
Sec. 9201. Contingencies.

 Subtitle B--Aggregate Federal Payments to Participating State

SEC. 9100. CAPPED FEDERAL PAYMENTS.

 (a) Capped Entitlement.--
 (1) Payment.--The Secretary shall provide for each calendar 
 quarter (beginning on or after January 1, 1996) for payment to 
 each participating State of an amount equal to the capped 
 Federal payment amount (as defined in subsection (b)(1)) for 
 each State for the quarter.
 (2) Entitlement.--This section constitutes budget authority 
 in advance of appropriations Acts, and represents the 
 obligation of the Federal Government to provide for the payment 
 to States of the capped Federal payment amount under this 
 section.
 (b) Capped Federal Payment Amount.--
 (1) In general.--In this section, the term ``capped Federal 
 payment amount'' means, for a State for a calendar quarter in a 
 year and subject to paragraph (6) and subsection (e), the 
 amount by which--
 (A) \1/4\ of the total payment obligation 
 (described in paragraph (2)) owed to community-rated 
 and experience-rated plans in a State for the year, 
 exceeds
 (B) \1/4\ of the total amounts receivable 
 (described in paragraph (3)) by community-rated and 
 experience-rated plans for the year.
 (2) Total payment obligation.--The total payment obligation 
 described in this paragraph in a State for a year is the total 
 amount payable to community-rated and experience-rated plans 
 for the following:
 (A) Plan payments (and certain cost sharing 
 reductions).--Payments to community-rated health plans 
 under section 6203 (including amounts attributable to 
 cost sharing reductions under section 1281, not 
 including a reduction under subsection (c)(2) thereof) 
 and equivalent payments to experience-rated plans.
 (B) Administrative expenses.--Payments to plans 
 retained by the State for administration (in accordance 
 with section 1213).
 (3) Total amounts receivable.--The total amounts receivable 
 in a State for a year is the sum of the following:
 (A) Premiums.--The amount payable to community-
 rated and experience-rated plans for the family share 
 of premiums (and premium equivalents), employer 
 premiums (and premium equivalents), and liabilities 
 owed to health plans under subtitle B of title VI, not 
 taking into account any failure to make or collect such 
 payments.
 (B) Other government payments.--The amounts payable 
 to health plans under sections 9001, 9011, and 9101, 
 payable under section 1894 of the Social Security Act 
 (as added by section 4003) during the year and payable 
 under paragraph (4)(C).
 (C) Payment to health plans.--Each participating 
 State is responsible for paying to community-rated 
 health plans a share of its savings under this Act. 
 Such amount shall equal 25 percent of the net reduction 
 in the projected expenditures of the State for health 
 care and related services that the National Health 
 Board estimates the State will experience as the result 
 of the enactment of this Act. A State may request the 
 National Health Board to review its estimate and shall 
 be entitled to present its case to the Board under 
 procedures to be established by the Board. This 
 subparagraph shall not be construed as providing a 
 State with a right to bring suit for such payment.
 (D) Additional amount.--The amount collected by the 
 State under section 6120.
 (4) No payment for certain amounts.--
 (A) In general.--Each participating State is 
 responsible, under section 1284, for the payment of 
 amounts attributable to administrative errors 
 (described in subparagraph (B)).
 (B) Administrative errors described.--The 
 administrative errors described in this subparagraph 
 include the following:
 (i) An eligibility error rate for premium 
 discounts, liability reductions, and cost 
 sharing reductions under sections 6104 and 
 6123, section 6113, and section 1281, 
 respectively, to the extent the applicable 
 error rate exceeds the maximum permissible 
 error rate, specified by the applicable 
 Secretary under section 1284, with respect to 
 the section involved.
 (ii) Misappropriations or other State 
 expenditures that the Secretary finds are 
 attributable to malfeasance or misfeasance by 
 the State.
 (5) Special rules for single-payer states.--In applying 
 this subsection in the case of a single-payer State, the 
 Secretary shall develop and apply a methodology for computing 
 an amount of payment (with respect to each calendar quarter) 
 that is equivalent to the amount of payment that would have 
 been made to the State for the quarter if the State were not a 
 single-payer State.
 (6) Large group purchasers.--The Secretary, in consultation 
 with the Secretary of Labor, shall withhold an appropriate 
 amount from the capped Federal payment amount as may be 
 necessary to make payments to plans offered by large group 
 purchasers.
 (c) Determination of Capped Federal Payment Amounts.--
 (1) Reports.--At such time as the Secretary may require 
 before the beginning of each fiscal year, each State shall 
 submit to the Secretary such information as the Secretary may 
 require to estimate the capped Federal payment amount under 
 this section for the succeeding calendar year (and the portion 
 of such year that falls in such fiscal year).
 (2) Estimation.--Before the beginning of each year, the 
 Secretary shall estimate the capped Federal payment amount for 
 calendar quarters in such year. Such estimate shall be based on 
 factors including prior financial experience in the State, 
 future estimates of income, wages, and employment, and other 
 characteristics of the area found relevant by the Secretary. 
 The Secretary shall transmit to Congress, on a timely basis 
 consistent with the timely appropriation of funds under this 
 section, a report that specifies an estimate of the total 
 capped Federal amounts owed to States under this section for 
 the fiscal and calendar year involved.
 (d) Payments to States.--Subject to subsection (e), the provisions 
of section 9101(b) apply to payments under this section in the same 
manner as they apply to payments under section 9101.
 (e) Cap on Payments.--
 (1) In general.--The total amount of the capped Federal 
 payments made under this section for quarters in a fiscal year 
 may not exceed the cap specified under paragraph (2) for the 
 fiscal year.
 (2) Cap.--Subject to paragraphs (3) and (6)--
 (A) Fiscal years 1996 through 2000.--The cap under 
 this paragraph for fiscal years 1996 through 2000 is 
 $285,000,000,000. Six months prior to the beginning of 
 fiscal year 1996, the National Health Board, in 
 consultation with the Director of the Office of 
 Management and Budget, shall determine the 
 apportionment of this amount among the fiscal years for 
 the period described in the preceding sentence.
 (B) Subsequent fiscal year.--The cap under this 
 paragraph for a fiscal year after fiscal year 2000 is 
 the cap under this paragraph for the previous fiscal 
 year (not taking into account paragraph (3)) multiplied 
 by the product of the factors described in subparagraph 
 (C) for that fiscal year and for each previous year 
 after fiscal year 2000.
 (C) Factor.--The factor described in this 
 subparagraph for a fiscal year is 1 plus the following:
 (i) CPI.--The percentage change in the CPI 
 for the fiscal year, determined based upon the 
 percentage change in the average of the CPI for 
 the 12-month period ending with May 31 of the 
 previous fiscal year over such average for the 
 preceding 12-month period.
 (ii) Population.--The average annual 
 percentage change in the population of the 
 United States during the 3-year period ending 
 in the preceding calendar year, determined by 
 the Board based on data supplied by the Bureau 
 of the Census.
 (iii) Real gdp per capita.--The average 
 annual percentage change in the real, per 
 capita gross domestic product of the United 
 States during the 3-year period ending in the 
 preceding calendar year, determined by the 
 Board based on data supplied by the Department 
 of Commerce.
 (3) Carryforward.--If the total of the capped Federal 
 payment amounts for all States for all calendar quarters in a 
 fiscal year is less than the cap specified in paragraph (2) for 
 the fiscal year, then the amount of such surplus shall be 
 accumulated and will be available in the case of a year in 
 which the cap would otherwise be breached.
 (4) Notification.--
 (A) In general.--If the Secretary anticipates that 
 the amount of the cap, plus any carryforward from a 
 previous year accumulated under paragraph (3), will not 
 be sufficient for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall 
 notify the President, the Congress, and each State. 
 Such notification shall include information about the 
 anticipated amount of the shortfall and the anticipated 
 time when the shortfall will first occur.
 (B) Required action.--Within 30 days after 
 receiving such a notice, the President shall submit to 
 Congress a report containing specific legislative 
 recommendations for actions which would eliminate the 
 shortfall.
 (5) Congressional consideration.--
 (A) Expedited consideration.--If a joint resolution 
 the substance of which approves the specific 
 recommendations submitted under paragraph (4)(B) is 
 introduced, subject to subparagraph (B), the provisions 
 of section 2908 (other than subsection (a)) of the 
 Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act of 1990 shall 
 apply to the consideration of the joint resolution in 
 the same manner as such provisions apply to a joint 
 resolution described in section 2908(a) of such Act.
 (B) Special rules.--For purposes of applying 
 subparagraph (A) with respect to such provisions, any 
 reference to the Committee on Armed Services of the 
 House of Representatives shall be deemed a reference to 
 an appropriate Committee of the House of 
 Representatives (specified by the Speaker of the House 
 of Representatives at the time of submission of 
 recommendations under paragraph (4)) and any reference 
 to the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate shall 
 be deemed a reference to an appropriate Committee of 
 the Senate (specified by the Majority Leader of the 
 Senate at the time of submission of such 
 recommendations).
 (6) Method for adjusting the cap for changes in 
 inflation.--If the inflation rate, as measured by the 
 percentage increase in the CPI, is projected to be 
 significantly different from the inflation rate projected by 
 the Council of Economic Advisors to the President as of October 
 1993, the Secretary may adjust the caps under paragraph (2) so 
 as to reflect such deviation from the projection.

 Subtitle C--Borrowing Authority to Cover Cash-flow Shortfalls

SEC. 9200. BORROWING AUTHORITY TO COVER CASH-FLOW SHORTFALLS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary shall make available loans to States 
in order to cover any period of temporary cash-flow shortfall 
attributable to any of the following:
 (1) Any estimation discrepancy (including those described 
 in subsection (e)(1)).
 (2) A period of temporary cash-flow shortfall attributable 
 to an administrative error (described in subsection (e)(2)).
 (3) A period of temporary cash-flow shortfall relating to 
 the relative timing during the year in which amounts are 
 received and payments are required to be made.
 (b) Terms and Conditions.--
 (1) In general.--Loans shall be made under this section 
 under terms and conditions, consistent with this subsection, 
 specified by the Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary 
 of the Treasury and taking into account Treasury cash 
 management rules.
 (2) Period.--Loans under this section shall be repayable 
 with interest over a period of not to exceed 2 years.
 (3) Interest rate.--The rate of interest on such loans 
 shall be at a rate determined by the Secretary of the Treasury 
 taking into consideration the current average rate on 
 outstanding marketable obligations of the United States.
 (4) Appropriate payment adjustments.--As a condition of 
 providing a loan under subsection (a)(1), the Secretary shall 
 require the State to make such adjustments under the 
 appropriate estimation adjustment provision (described in 
 subsection (f)) in order to assure the repayment of the amount 
 so borrowed.
 (5) Limitation on loan balance outstanding.--The total 
 balance of loans outstanding at any time to a State shall not 
 exceed--
 (A) for the first year, 25 percent of the estimated 
 total premiums for the State for such year, or
 (B) for a subsequent year, 25 percent of the actual 
 total premiums for the State for the previous year.
 (c) Repayment.--
 (1) Estimation discrepancies and timing.--Loans made under 
 paragraphs (1) and (3) of subsection (a) shall be repaid 
 through a reduction in the payment amounts otherwise required 
 to be made under section 9102 to the State.
 (2) Administrative error.--Loans made under subsection 
 (a)(2) shall be repaid through a temporary increase in the 
 amount of the State maintenance-of-effort payment required 
 under section 9001.
 (d) Reports.--The Secretary shall annually report to Congress on 
the loans made (and loan amounts repaid) under this section.
 (e) Sources of Discrepancy Described.--
 (1) Estimation discrepancies.--The estimation discrepancies 
 described in this paragraph are discrepancies in estimating the 
 following:
 (A) The average premium payments per family under 
 section 6122(b).
 (B) The AFDC and SSI proportions under section 
 6202.
 (C) The distribution of enrolled families in 
 different risk categories for purposes of section 
 1351(c).
 (D) The distribution of enrollment in excess 
 premium plans (for purposes of calculating and applying 
 the reduced weighted average accepted bid under section 
 6105(c)(1)).
 (E) The collection shortfalls (used in computing 
 the family collection shortfall add-on under section 
 6107).
 (2) Administrative errors.--The administrative errors 
 described in this paragraph are errors described in section 
 9201(b)(4)(B)(ii).
 (f) Estimation Adjustment Provisions Described.--The estimation 
adjustment provisions, referred to in subsection (b)(4)) are the 
following adjustments (corresponding to the respective estimation 
discrepancies specified in subsection (d)(1)):
 (1) Adjustments for average premium payments per family 
 under section 6122(b)(4).
 (2) Adjustments in the AFDC and SSI proportions under 
 section 6202(d).
 (3) Adjustments pursuant to the methodology described in 
 section 1641.
 (4) Adjustments in excess premium credit pursuant to 
 section 6105(b)(2).
 (5) Adjustment in the collection shortfall add-on under 
 section 6107(b)(2)(C)).
 (g) Advances; Limitations on Advances.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Secretary of 
 the Treasury is authorized to advance to the Secretary, under 
 terms and conditions determined by the Secretary of the 
 Treasury, amounts sufficient to cover the loans made to States 
 by the Secretary under this section.
 (2) Limitation.--The total balance of Treasury advances 
 outstanding at any time to the Secretary under paragraph (1) 
 shall not exceed $3,500,000,000.

SEC. 9201. CONTINGENCIES.

 Each State shall provide that any surplus of funds resulting from 
an estimation discrepancy described in section 9200(e)(1), up to a 
reasonable amount specified by the Secretary, shall be held in a 
contingency fund established by the State and used to fund any future 
shortfalls resulting from such a discrepancy.

 TITLE X--WORKERS COMPENSATION MEDICAL SERVICES

 table of contents of title

 TITLE X--WORKERS COMPENSATION MEDICAL SERVICES

Sec. 10000. Application of information requirements.
Sec. 10001. Provision of care in disputed cases.
Sec. 10002. Demonstration projects.
Sec. 10003. Commission on workers compensation medical services.

SEC. 10000. APPLICATION OF INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) In General.--The provisions of--
 (1) part 3 of subtitle B of title V (relating to use of 
 standard forms); and
 (2) section 1916(2) (relating to health care information);
shall apply to the provision of workers compensation medical services 
provided by a health plan or health care provider in the same manner as 
such provisions apply with respect to the provision of services 
included in the comprehensive benefit package.
 (b) Information.--Subject to the provisions of part 2 of subtitle B 
of title V, health plans and health care providers that render workers 
compensation medical services shall provide to the worker and to the 
workers compensation carrier, the employer or both, as appropriate, 
relevant health care information necessary to assist the worker in the 
safe and timely return to work.
 (c) Compliance With Duties and Requirements.--The health plan and 
its providers shall comply with legal duties and reporting requirements 
under State workers compensation laws, and other Federal and State 
laws, including laws regarding the reporting of occupational injuries 
and diseases.
 (d) Rules.--The Secretary of Labor shall promulgate rules to 
clarify the responsibilities of health plans and health care providers 
in carrying out the provisions referred to in subsection (a).

SEC. 10001. PROVISION OF CARE IN DISPUTED CASES.

 (a) In General.--In cases in which a workers compensation claim is 
challenged by the employer, the workers compensation carrier, or both, 
a health plan shall provide or pay for all medical care included in the 
comprehensive benefits package according to the applicable workers 
compensation fee schedule, if any, until such time as a determination 
is made through the adjudication process that the claim is compensable 
as a workers compensation claim. If such a determination is made, the 
workers compensation carrier (or the employer, if self insured) shall 
reimburse the health plan (for the cost of services delivered to the 
member for the work-related illness or injury) and the worker (for any 
copayments, deductibles or coinsurance costs incurred for such 
services).
 (b) Applicability.--Subsection (a) shall not apply in a case where 
compensation has been accepted by the insurer or the employer, or paid 
without prejudice.

SEC. 10002. DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS.

 (a) Authorization.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services and 
the Secretary of Labor are authorized to conduct demonstration projects 
under this section in one or more States with respect to treatment of 
work-related injuries and illnesses.
 (b) Development of Work-Related Protocols.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 and the Secretary of Labor, in consultation with the States and 
 such experts on work-related injuries and illnesses as each 
 such Secretary finds appropriate, shall develop protocols for 
 the appropriate treatment of work-related conditions.
 (2) Testing of protocols.--The Secretary of Health and 
 Human Services and the Secretary of Labor shall enter into 
 contracts with one or more community-rated health plans to test 
 the validity of the protocols developed under subsection (a).
 (c) Development of Capitation Payment Models.--The Secretary of 
Health and Human Services and the Secretary of Labor shall develop, 
using protocols developed under subsection (b) if possible, methods of 
providing for payment by workers compensation carriers to health plans 
on a per case basis, capitated payment for the treatment of specified 
work-related injuries and illnesses.

SEC. 10003. COMMISSION ON WORKERS COMPENSATION MEDICAL SERVICES.

 (a) Establishment.--There is created a Commission on Workers 
Compensation Medical Services (in this section referred to as the 
``Commission'').
 (b) Composition.--
 (1) In general.--The Commission shall consist of 15 members 
 appointed in accordance with paragraph (2). Members of the 
 Commission shall include--
 (A) one or more individuals representing State 
 workers compensation commissioners;
 (B) one or more individuals representing State 
 workers compensation funds;
 (C) one or more individuals representing labor 
 organizations;
 (D) one or more members representing employers 
 (other than workers compensation insurance carriers);
 (E) one or more members representing workers 
 compensation insurance carriers;
 (F) one or more members of the medical profession 
 having expertise in occupational health; and
 (G) one or more educators or researchers having 
 expertise in the field of occupational health.
 Eight members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum.
 (2) Appointments.--Members of the Commission shall be 
 appointed by the President and shall include--
 (A) three members appointed from among individuals 
 recommended by the Speaker of the House of 
 Representatives;
 (B) three members appointed from among individuals 
 recommended by the Minority Leader of the House of 
 Representatives;
 (C) three members appointed from among individuals 
 recommended by the Majority Leader of the Senate; and
 (D) three members appointed from among individuals 
 recommended by the Minority Leader of the Senate.
 (3) No compensation except travel expenses.--Members of the 
 Commission shall serve without compensation, but each member 
 shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of 
 subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 
 5, United States Code.
 (c) Duties.--
 (1) In general.--The Commission shall study the 
 relationship of workers compensation medical services to the 
 new health system under this Act in terms of impact on the cost 
 of workers compensation medical services, access to appropriate 
 care for injured workers, and quality of medical care and its 
 impact on functional and vocational outcomes for injured 
 workers.
 (2) Evaluation issues to be addressed.--In its 
 deliberations under paragraph (1), the Commission shall 
 consider the following issues in examining the relationship 
 between health plans and workers compensation medical services:
 (A) The impact of health reform on workers 
 compensation medical costs and premium rates charged to 
 employers for workers compensation insurance.
 (B) The extent and impact of cost-shifting and 
 price discrimination between the workers compensation 
 medical system and traditional health insurers.
 (C) The impact of experience rating adjustments 
 resulting from workers compensation medical services on 
 workplace safety.
 (D) The advantages and disadvantages of maintaining 
 separate financing, payment and delivery systems for 
 workers compensation medical services, including the 
 impact on--
 (i) the quality of medical care delivered 
 to workers injured or made ill on the job;
 (ii) the incentives for employers to 
 maintain safe work-places; and
 (iii) workers compensation indemnity 
 benefit costs, medical costs and the overall 
 costs of the workers compensation system.
 (E) The advisability and appropriateness of 
 transferring financial responsibility for some or all 
 workers compensation medical benefits to health plans.
 (F) The impact of State-to-State variations in 
 medical and rehabilitation benefits on costs, access 
 and quality of care.
 (G) The options that are available to accomplish 
 the delivery of workers compensation benefits not 
 included in the comprehensive benefit package in 
 integrated systems
 (H) Whether capitated rates can be developed for 
 workers compensation medical benefits, and the impact 
 of using such rates on medical and indemnity costs, 
 access, and quality of care.
 (I) The impact of provider choice, with respect to 
 an injured worker, on workers compensation medical 
 costs, wage-loss benefits costs, and quality of care.
 (d) Staff Support.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services and 
the Secretary of Labor shall provide staff support for the Commission.
 (e) Reports.--The Commission shall submit a final report on its 
work to the President, the Committee on Labor and Human Resources of 
the Senate and the Committee on Education and Labor of the House of 
Representatives, by not later than October 1, 2000. Such report shall 
include a recommendation as to whether a transfer of financial 
responsibility for some or all medical benefits to health plans should 
be effected, and a detailed implementation plan should such a transfer 
be recommended. Prior to the submission of the final report, the 
Commission shall submit such interim reports on issues addressed by the 
Commission as the members of the Commission determine to be 
appropriate.

 TITLE XI--TRANSITIONAL INSURANCE REFORM

 table of contents of title

Sec. 11001. Imposition of requirements.
Sec. 11002. Enforcement.
Sec. 11003. Requirements relating to preserving current coverage.
Sec. 11004. Restrictions on premium increases during transition.
Sec. 11005. Requirements relating to portability.
Sec. 11006. Requirements limiting reduction of benefits.
Sec. 11007. National transitional health insurance risk pool.
Sec. 11008. Definitions.
Sec. 11009. Termination.

SEC. 11001. IMPOSITION OF REQUIREMENTS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary and the Secretary of Labor shall 
apply the provisions of this title to assure, to the extent possible, 
the maintenance of current health care coverage and benefits during the 
period between the enactment of this Act and the dates its provisions 
are implemented in the various States.
 (b) Enforcement.--
 (1) Health insurance plans.--The Secretary shall enforce 
 the requirements of this title with respect to health insurance 
 plans. The Secretary shall promulgate regulations to carry out 
 the requirements under this title with respect to health 
 insurance plans. The Secretary shall promulgate regulations 
 with respect to section 11004 within 90 days after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act.
 (2) Self-insured plans.--The Secretary of Labor shall 
 enforce the requirements of this title with respect to self-
 insured plans. Such Secretary shall promulgate regulations to 
 carry out the requirements under this title as they relate to 
 self-funded plans.
 (3) Arrangements with states.--The Secretary and the 
 Secretary of Labor may enter into arrangements with a State to 
 enforce the requirements of this title with respect to health 
 insurance plans and self-insured plans issued or sold, or 
 established and maintained, in the State.
 (c) Preemption.--The requirements of this title do not preempt any 
State law unless State law directly conflicts with such requirements. 
The provision of additional protections under State law shall not be 
considered to directly conflict with such requirements. The Secretary 
(or, in the case of a self-insured plan, the Secretary of Labor) may 
issue letter determinations with respect to whether this Act preempts a 
provision of State law.
 (d) Interim Final Regulations.--Section 1911 shall apply to 
regulations issued to carry out this title. The Secretary may consult 
with States and the National Association of Insurance Commissioners in 
issuing regulations and guidelines under this title.
 (e) Construction.--The provisions of this title shall be construed 
in a manner that assures, to the greatest extent practicable, 
continuity of health benefits under health benefit plans in effect on 
the effective date of this Act.
 (f) Special Rules for Acquisitions and Transfers.--The Secretary 
may issue regulations regarding the application of this title in the 
case of health insurance plans (or groups of such plans) which are 
transferred from one insurer to another insurer through assumption, 
acquisition, or otherwise.

SEC. 11002. ENFORCEMENT.

 (a) In General.--Any health insurer or health benefit plan sponsor 
that violates a requirement of this title shall be subject to a civil 
money penalty of not more than $25,000 for each such violation. The 
provisions of section 1128A of the Social Security Act (other than 
subsections (a) and (b)) shall apply to civil money penalties under 
this subsection in the same manner as they apply to a penalty or 
proceeding under section 1128A(a) of such Act.
 (b) Equitable Remedies.--
 (1) In general.--A civil action may be brought by the 
 applicable Secretary--
 (A) to enjoin any act or practice which violates 
 any provision of this title, or
 (B) to obtain other appropriate equitable relief 
 (i) to redress such violations, or (ii) to enforce any 
 provision of this title, including, in the case of a 
 wrongful termination of (or refusal to renew) coverage, 
 reinstating coverage effective as of the date of the 
 violation.

SEC. 11003. REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO PRESERVING CURRENT COVERAGE.

 (a) Prohibition of Termination.--
 (1) Group health insurance plans.--Each health insurer that 
 provides a group health insurance plan may not terminate (or 
 fail to renew) coverage for any covered employee if the 
 employer of the employee continues the plan, except in the case 
 of--
 (A) nonpayment of required premiums,
 (B) fraud, or
 (C) misrepresentation of a material fact relating 
 to an application for coverage or claim for benefits.
 (2) Individual health insurance plans.--Each health insurer 
 that provides coverage to a covered individual under an 
 individual health insurance plan may not terminate (or fail to 
 renew) coverage for such individual (or a covered dependent), 
 except in the case of--
 (A) nonpayment of required premiums,
 (B) fraud, or
 (C) misrepresentation of a material fact relating 
 to an application for coverage or claim for benefits.
 (2) Effective date of title.--
 (A) In general.--This subsection shall take effect 
 on the effective date of this title and shall apply to 
 coverage on or after such date.
 (B) Definition.--Except as otherwise provided, in 
 this title the term ``effective date of this title'' 
 means the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (b) Acceptance of New Members in a Group Health Insurance Plan.--
 (1) In general.--In the case of a health insurer that 
 provides a group health insurance plan that is in effect on the 
 effective date of this title, the insurer is required--
 (A) to accept all individuals, and their eligible 
 dependents, who become full-time employees (as defined 
 in section 1901(b)(2)(C)) of an employer covered after 
 such effective date;
 (B) to establish and apply premium rates that are 
 consistent with section 11004(b); and
 (C) to limit the application of pre-existing 
 condition restrictions in accordance with section 
 11005.
 (2) Consistent application of rules relating to dependents 
 and waiting periods.--In this subsection, the term ``eligible 
 dependent'', with respect to a group health insurance plan, has 
 the meaning provided under the plan as of October 27, 1993, or, 
 in the case of a plan not established as of such date, as of 
 the date of establishment of the plan.

SEC. 11004. RESTRICTIONS ON PREMIUM INCREASES DURING TRANSITION.

 (a) Division of Health Insurance Plans by Sector.--For purposes of 
this section, each health insurer shall divide its health insurance 
business into the following 3 sectors:
 (1) Health insurance for groups with at least 100 covered 
 lives (in this section referred to as the ``large group 
 sector'')
 (2) Health insurance for groups with fewer than 100 covered 
 lives (in this section referred to as the ``small group 
 sector'').
 (3) Health insurance for individuals, and not for groups 
 (in this section referred to as the ``individual sector'').
 (b) Premium Changes to Reflect Changes in Group or Individual 
Characteristics or Terms of Coverage.--
 (1) Application.--The provisions of this subsection shall 
 apply to changes in premiums that reflect--
 (A) changes in the number of individuals covered 
 under a plan;
 (B) changes in the group or individual 
 characteristics (including age, gender, family 
 composition or geographic area but not including health 
 status, claims experience or duration of coverage under 
 the plan) of individuals covered under a plan;
 (C) changes in the level of benefits (including 
 changes in cost-sharing) under the plan; and
 (D) changes in any material terms and conditions of 
 the health insurance plan (other than factors related 
 to health status, claims experience, and duration of 
 coverage under the plan).
 (2) Specification of reference rate for each sector.--Each 
 health insurer shall calculate a reference rate for each such 
 sector. The reference rate for a sector shall be calculated so 
 that, if it were applied using the rate factors specified under 
 paragraph (3), the average premium rate for individuals and 
 groups in that sector would approximate the average premium 
 rate charged individuals and groups in the sector as of the 
 effective date of this title.
 (3) Single set of rate factors within each sector.--
 (A) In general.--Each health insurer shall develop 
 for each sector a single set of rate factors which will 
 be used to calculate any changes in premium that relate 
 to the reasons described in subparagraphs (B) through 
 (D) of paragraph (1).
 (B) Standards.--Such rate factors--
 (i) shall relate to reasonable and 
 objective differences in demographic 
 characteristics, in the design and in levels of 
 coverage, and in other terms and conditions of 
 a contract,
 (ii) shall not relate to expected health 
 status, claims experience, or duration of 
 coverage of the one or more groups or 
 individuals, and
 (iii) shall comply with regulations 
 established under subsection (f).
 (4) Computation of premium changes.--
 (A) In general.--Changes in premium rates that 
 relate to the reasons described in paragraph (1) shall 
 be calculated using the rate factors developed pursuant 
 to paragraph (3).
 (B) Application to changes in number of covered 
 individuals.--In the case of a change in premium rates 
 related to the reason described in paragraph (1)(A), 
 the change in premium rates shall be calculated to 
 reflect, with respect to the enrollees who enroll or 
 disenroll in a health insurance plan, the sum of the 
 products, for such individuals, of the reference rate 
 (determined under paragraph (2)) and the rate factors 
 (specified under paragraph (3)) applicable to such 
 enrollees.
 (C) Application of other factors.--
 (i) In general.--In the case of a change in 
 premium rates related to a reason described in 
 subparagraph (B), (C), or (D) of paragraph (1), 
 the change in premium rates with respect to 
 each health insurance plan in each sector shall 
 reflect the rate factors specified under 
 paragraph (3) applicable to the reason as 
 applied to the current premium charged for the 
 health insurance plan. Such rate factors shall 
 be applied in a manner so that the resulting 
 adjustment, to the extent possible, reflects 
 the premium that would have been charged under 
 the plan if the reason for the change in 
 premium had existed at the time that the 
 current premium rate was calculated.
 (ii) No reflection of change in health 
 status.--In applying the rate factors under 
 this subparagraph, the adjustment shall not 
 reflect any change in the health status, claims 
 experience or duration of coverage with respect 
 to any employer or individual covered under the 
 plan.
 (5) Limitation on application.--This subsection shall only 
 apply--
 (A) to changes in premiums occurring on or after 
 the date of the enactment of this Act to groups and 
 individuals covered as of such date, and
 (B) with respect to groups and individuals 
 subsequently covered, to changes in premiums subsequent 
 to such coverage.
 (6) Application to community-rated plans.--Nothing in this 
 subsection shall require the application of rate factors 
 related to individual or group characteristics with respect to 
 community-rated plans.
 (c) Limitations on Changes in Premiums Related to Increases in 
Health Care Costs and Utilization.--
 (1) Application.--The provisions of this subsection shall 
 apply to changes in premiums that reflect increases in health 
 care costs and utilization.
 (2) Equal increase for all plans in all sectors.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the 
 annual percentage increase in premiums by a health 
 insurer for health insurance plans in the individual 
 sector, small group sector, and large group sector, to 
 the extent such increase reflect increases in health 
 care costs and utilization, shall be the same for all 
 such plans in those sectors.
 (B) Special rule for large group sector.--The 
 annual percentage increase in premiums by a health 
 insurer for health insurance plans in the large group 
 sector may vary among such plans based on the claims 
 experience of an employer (to the extent the experience 
 is credible), so long as the weighted average of such 
 increases for all such plans in the sector complies 
 with the requirement of subparagraph (A).
 (C) Geographic application.--Subparagraphs (A) and 
 (B)--
 (i) may be applied on a national level, or
 (ii) may vary based on geographic area, but 
 only if (I) such areas are sufficiently large 
 to provide credible data on which to calculate 
 the variation and (II) the variation is due to 
 reasonable factors related to the objective 
 differences among such areas in costs and 
 utilization of health services.
 (D) Exceptions to accommodate state rate reform 
 efforts.--Subparagraphs (A) and (B) shall not apply, in 
 accordance with guidelines of the Secretary, to the 
 extent necessary to permit a State to narrow the 
 variations in premiums among health insurance plans 
 offered by health insurers to similarly situated groups 
 or individuals within a sector.
 (E) Exception for rates subject to prior 
 approval.--Subparagraphs (A) and (B) shall not apply to 
 premiums that are subject to prior approval by a State 
 insurance commissioner (or similar official) and are 
 approved by such official.
 (F) Other reasons specified by the secretary.--The 
 Secretary may specify through regulations such other 
 exceptions to the provisions of this subsection as the 
 Secretary determines are required to enhance stability 
 of the health insurance market and continued 
 availability of coverage.
 (3) Even application throughout a year.--In applying the 
 provisions of this subsection to health insurance plans that 
 are renewed in different months of a year, the annual 
 percentage increase shall be applied in a consistent, even 
 manner so that any variations in the rate of increase applied 
 in consecutive months are even and continuous during the year.
 (4) Petition for exception.--A health insurer may petition 
 the Secretary (or a State acting under a contract with the 
 Secretary under section 11001(b)(3)) for an exception from the 
 application of the provisions of this subsection. The Secretary 
 may approve such an exception if--
 (A) the health insurer demonstrates that the 
 application of this subsection would threaten the 
 financial viability of the insurer, and
 (B) the health insurer offers an alternative method 
 for increasing premiums that is not substantially 
 discriminatory to any sector or to any group or 
 individual covered by a health insurance plan offered 
 by the insurer.
 (d) Prior Approval for Certain Rate Increases.--
 (1) In general.--If the percentage increase in the premium 
 rate for the individual and small group sector exceeds a 
 percentage specified by the Secretary under paragraph (2), 
 annualized over any 12-month period, the increase shall not 
 take effect unless the Secretary (or a State acting under a 
 contract with the Secretary under section 11001(b)(3)) has 
 approved the increase.
 (2) Percentage.--The Secretary shall specify, for each 12-
 month period beginning after the date of the enactment of this 
 Act, a percentage that will apply under paragraph (1). Such 
 percentage shall be determined taking into consideration the 
 rate of increase in health care costs and utilization, previous 
 trends in health insurance premiums, and the conditions in the 
 health insurance market. Within 30 days after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall first specify a 
 percentage under this paragraph.
 (e) Documentation of Compliance.--
 (1) Period for conformance.--Effective 1 year after the 
 date of the enactment of this Act, the premium for each health 
 insurance plan shall be conformed in a manner that complies 
 with the provisions of this section.
 (2) Methodology.--Each health insurer shall document the 
 methodology used in applying subsections (b) and (c) with 
 respect to each sector (and each applicable health plan). Such 
 documentation shall be sufficient to permit the auditing of the 
 application of such methodology to determine if such 
 application was consistent with such subsections.
 (3) Certification.--For each 6-month period in which this 
 section is effective, each health insurer shall file a 
 certification with the Secretary (or with a State with which 
 the Secretary has entered into an arrangement under section 
 11001(b)(3)) that the insurer is in compliance with such 
 requirements.
 (f) Regulations.--The Secretary shall establish regulations to 
carry out this section. Such regulations may include guidelines 
relating to the permissible variation that results from the use of 
demographic or other characteristics in the development of rate 
factors. Such guidelines may be based on the guidelines currently used 
by States in applying rate limitations under State insurance 
regulations.
 (g) Effective Period.--This section shall apply to premium 
increases occurring during the period beginning on the date of the 
enactment of this Act and ending, for a health insurance plan provided 
in a State, on the first day of the State's first year.

SEC. 11005. REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO PORTABILITY.

 (a) Treatment of Preexisting Condition Exclusions.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to the succeeding provisions of 
 this subsection, a group health benefit plan may exclude 
 coverage with respect to services related to treatment of a 
 preexisting condition, but the period of such exclusion may not 
 exceed 6 months. The exclusion of coverage shall not apply to 
 services furnished to newborns or in the case of a plan that 
 did not apply such exclusions as of the effective date of this 
 title.
 (2) Crediting of previous coverage.--
 (A) In general.--A group health benefit plan shall 
 provide that if an individual covered under such plan 
 is in a period of continuous coverage (as defined in 
 subparagraph (B)(i)) with respect to particular 
 services as of the date of initial coverage under such 
 plan, any period of exclusion of coverage with respect 
 to a preexisting condition for such services or type of 
 services shall be reduced by 1 month for each month in 
 the period of continuous coverage.
 (B) Definitions.--As used in this paragraph:
 (i) Period of continuous coverage.--The 
 term ``period of continuous coverage'' means, 
 with respect to particular services, the period 
 beginning on the date an individual is enrolled 
 under a group or individual health benefit 
 plan, self-insured plan, the medicare program, 
 a State medicaid plan, or other health benefit 
 arrangement which provides benefits with 
 respect to such services and ends on the date 
 the individual is not so enrolled for a 
 continuous period of more than 3 months.
 (ii) Preexisting condition.--The term 
 ``preexisting condition'' means, with respect 
 to coverage under a health benefits plan, a 
 condition which has been diagnosed or treated 
 during the 6-month period ending on the day 
 before the first date of such coverage (without 
 regard to any waiting period).
 (b) Waiting Periods.--A self-insured plan, and an employer with 
respect to a group health insurance plan, may not discriminate among 
employees in the establishment of a waiting period before making health 
insurance coverage available based on the health status, claims 
experience, receipt of health care, medical history, or lack of 
evidence of insurability, of the employee or the employee's dependents.

SEC. 11006. REQUIREMENTS LIMITING REDUCTION OF BENEFITS.

 (a) In General.--A self-insured sponsor may not make a modification 
of benefits described in subsection (b).
 (b) Modification of Benefits Described.--
 (1) In general.--A modification of benefits described in 
 this subsection is any reduction or limitation in coverage, 
 effected on or after the effective date of this title, with 
 respect to any medical condition or course of treatment for 
 which the anticipated cost is likely to exceed $5,000 in any 
 12-month period.
 (2) Treatment of termination.--A modification of benefits 
 includes the termination of a plan if the sponsor, within a 
 period (specified by the Secretary of Labor) establishes a 
 substitute plan that reflects the reduction or limitation 
 described in paragraph (1).
 (c) Remedy.--Any modification made in violation of this section 
shall not be effective and the self-insured sponsor shall continue to 
provide benefits as though the modification (described in subsection 
(b)) had not occurred.

SEC. 11007. NATIONAL TRANSITIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE RISK POOL.

 (a) Establishment.--In order to assure access to health insurance 
during the transition, the Secretary is authorized to establish a 
National Transitional Health Insurance Risk Pool (in this section 
referred to as the ``national risk pool'') in accordance with this 
section.
 (b) Administration.--
 (1) In general.--The Secretary may administer the national 
 risk pool through contracts with--
 (A) one or more existing State health insurance 
 risk pools,
 (B) one or more private health insurers, or
 (C) such other contracts as the Secretary deems 
 appropriate.
 (2) Coordination with state risk pools.--The Secretary may 
 enter into such arrangements with existing State health 
 insurance risk pools to coordinate the coverage under such 
 pools with the coverage under the national risk pool. Such 
 coordination may address eligibility and funding of coverage 
 for individuals currently covered under State risk pools.
 (c) Eligibility for Coverage.--The national risk pool shall provide 
health insurance coverage to individuals who are unable to secure 
health insurance coverage from private health insurers because of their 
health status or condition (as determined in accordance with rules and 
procedures specified by the Secretary).
 (d) Benefits.--
 (1) In general.--Benefits and terms of coverage provided 
 through the national risk pool shall include items and 
 services, conditions of coverage, and cost sharing (subject to 
 out-of-pocket limits on cost sharing) comparable to the 
 benefits and terms of coverage available in State health 
 insurance risk pools.
 (2) Payment rates.--Payments under the national risk pool 
 for covered items and services shall be made at rates 
 (specified by the Secretary) based on payment rates for 
 comparable items and services under the medicare program. 
 Providers who accept payment from the national risk pool shall 
 accept such payment as payment in full for the service, other 
 than for cost sharing provided under the national risk pool.
 (e) Premiums.--
 (1) In general.--Premiums for coverage in the national risk 
 pool shall be set in a manner specified by the Secretary.
 (2) Variation.--Such premiums shall vary based upon age, 
 place of residence, and other traditional underwriting factors 
 other than on the basis of health status or claims experience.
 (3) Limitation.--The premiums charged individuals shall be 
 set at a level that is no less than 150 percent of the premiums 
 that the Secretary estimates would be charged to a population 
 of average risk for the covered benefits.
 (f) Treatment of Shortfalls.--
 (1) Estimates.--The Secretary shall estimate each year the 
 extent to which the total premiums collected under subsection 
 (e) in the year are insufficient to cover the expenses of the 
 national risk pool with respect to the year.
 (2) Temporary borrowing authority.--The Secretary of the 
 Treasury is authorized to advance to the Secretary amounts 
 sufficient to cover the amount estimated under paragraph (1) 
 during the year before assessments are collected under 
 paragraph (3), except that the total balance of such Treasury 
 advances at any time shall not exceed $1,500,000,000. The 
 Secretary shall repay such amounts, with interest at a rate 
 specified by the Secretary of the Treasury, from the 
 assessments under paragraph (3).
 (3) Assessments.--
 (A) In general.--Each health benefit plan sponsor 
 shall be liable for an assessment in the amount 
 specified in subparagraph (C).
 (B) Amount.--For each year for which amounts are 
 advanced under paragraph (2), the Secretary shall--
 (i) estimate the total amount of premiums 
 (and premium equivalents) for health benefits 
 under health benefit plans for the succeeding 
 year, and
 (ii) calculate a percentage equal to (I) 
 the total amounts repayable by the Secretary to 
 the Secretary of the Treasury under paragraph 
 (2) for the year, divided by the amount 
 determined under clause (i).
 (C) Assessment amount.--The amount of an assessment 
 for a sponsor of a health benefit plan for a year shall 
 be equal to the percentage calculated under 
 subparagraph (B)(ii) (or, if less, \1/2\ of 1 percent) 
 of the total amount of premiums (and premium 
 equivalents) for health benefits under the plan for the 
 previous year.
 (D) Self-insured plans.--The amount of premiums 
 (and premium equivalents) under this paragraph shall be 
 estimated--
 (i) by the Secretary for health insurance 
 plans, and
 (ii) by the Secretary of Labor for self-
 insured plans.
 Such estimates may be based on a methodology that 
 requires plans liable for assessment to file 
 information with the applicable Secretary.

SEC. 11008. DEFINITIONS.

 In this title:
 (1) Applicable secretary.--The term ``applicable 
 Secretary'' means--
 (A) the Secretary with respect to health insurance 
 plans and insurers, or
 (B) the Secretary of Labor with respect to self-
 insured plans and self-insured plan sponsors.
 (2) Covered employee.--The term ``covered employee'' means 
 an employee (or dependent of such an employee) covered under a 
 group health benefits plan.
 (3) Covered individual.--The ``covered individual'' means, 
 with respect to a health benefit plan, an individual insured, 
 enrolled, eligible for benefits, or otherwise covered under the 
 plan.
 (4) Group health benefits plan.--The term ``group health 
 benefits plan'' means a group health insurance plan and a self-
 insured plan.
 (5) Group health insurance plan.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``group health insurance 
 plan'' means a health insurance plan offered primarily 
 to employers for the purpose of providing health 
 insurance to the employees (and dependents) of the 
 employer.
 (B) Inclusion of association plans and mewas.--Such 
 term includes--
 (i) any arrangement in which coverage for 
 health benefits is offered to employers through 
 an association, trust, or other arrangement, 
 and
 (ii) a multiple employer welfare 
 arrangement (as defined in section 3(40) of the 
 Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 
 1974), whether funded through insurance or 
 otherwise.
 (6) Health benefits plan.--The term ``health benefits 
 plan'' means health insurance plan and a self-insured health 
 benefit plan.
 (7) Health benefit plan sponsor.--The term ``health benefit 
 plan sponsor'' means, with respect to a health insurance plan 
 or self-insured plan, the insurer offering the plan or the 
 self-insured sponsor for the plan, respectively.
 (8) Health insurance plan.--
 (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph 
 (B), the term ``health insurance plan'' means any 
 contract of health insurance, including any hospital or 
 medical service policy or certificate, any major 
 medical policy or certificate, any hospital or medical 
 service plan contract, or health maintenance 
 organization subscriber contract offered by an insurer.
 (B) Exception.--Such term does not include any of 
 the following--
 (i) coverage only for accident, dental, 
 vision, disability income, or long-term care 
 insurance, or any combination thereof,
 (ii) medicare supplemental health 
 insurance,
 (iii) coverage issued as a supplement to 
 liability insurance,
 (iv) worker's compensation or similar 
 insurance, or
 (v) automobile medical payment insurance,
 or any combination thereof.
 (C) Stop loss insurance not covered.--Such term 
 does not include any aggregate or specific stop-loss 
 insurance or similar coverage applicable to a self-
 insured plan. The Secretary may develop rules 
 determining the applicability of this subparagraph with 
 respect to minimum premium plans or other partially 
 insured plans.
 (9) Health insurer.--The term ``health insurer'' means a 
 licensed insurance company, a prepaid hospital or medical 
 service plan, a health maintenance organization, or other 
 entity providing a plan of health insurance or health benefits 
 with respect to which the State insurance laws are not 
 preempted under section 514 of the Employee Retirement Income 
 Security Act of 1974.
 (10) Individual health insurance plan.--
 (A) In general.--The term ``individual health 
 insurance plan'' means any health insurance plan 
 directly purchased by an individual or offered 
 primarily to individuals (including families) for the 
 purpose of permitting individuals (without regard to an 
 employer contribution) to purchase health insurance 
 coverage.
 (B) Inclusion of association plans.--Such term 
 includes any arrangement in which coverage for health 
 benefits is offered to individuals through an 
 association, trust, list-billing arrangement, or other 
 arrangement in which the individual purchaser is 
 primarily responsible for the payment of any premium 
 associated with the contract.
 (C) Treatment of certain association plans.--In the 
 case of a health insurance plan sponsored by an 
 association, trust, or other arrangement that provides 
 health insurance coverage both to employers and to 
 individuals, the plan shall be treated as--
 (i) a group health insurance plan with 
 respect to such employers, and
 (ii) an individual health insurance plan 
 with respect to such individuals.
 (11) Self-insured plan.--The term ``self-insured plan'' 
 means an employee welfare benefit plan or other arrangement 
 insofar as the plan or arrangement provides benefits with 
 respect to some or all of the items and services included in 
 the comprehensive benefit package (as in effect as of January 
 1, 1996) that is funded in a manner other than through the 
 purchase of one or more health insurance plans. Such term shall 
 not include a group health insurance plan described in 
 paragraph (5)(B)(ii).
 (12) Self-insured sponsor.--The term ``self-insured 
 sponsor'' includes, with respect to a self-insured plan, any 
 entity which establishes or maintains the plan.
 (13) State commissioner of insurance.--The term ``State 
 commissioner of insurance'' includes a State superintendent of 
 insurance.

SEC. 11009. TERMINATION.

 (a) Health Insurance Plans.--The provisions of this title shall not 
apply to a health insurance plan provided in a State on and after the 
first day of the first year for the State.
 (b) Self-Insured Plans.--The provisions of this title shall not 
apply to a self-insured plan that--
 (1) is sponsored by a sponsor that is an eligible sponsor 
 of a large group sponsor (described in section 1311(b)(1)), as 
 of the effective date of the election under section 1312(c); or
 (2) is sponsored by a sponsor that is not such an eligible 
 sponsor, with respect to individuals or groups in a State on 
 and after the first day of the first year for the State.
S 2296 PCS----2
S 2296 PCS----3
S 2296 PCS----4
S 2296 PCS----5
S 2296 PCS----6
S 2296 PCS----7
S 2296 PCS----8
S 2296 PCS----9
S 2296 PCS----10
S 2296 PCS----11
S 2296 PCS----12
S 2296 PCS----13
S 2296 PCS----14
S 2296 PCS----15
S 2296 PCS----16
S 2296 PCS----17
S 2296 PCS----18
S 2296 PCS----19
S 2296 PCS----20
S 2296 PCS----21
S 2296 PCS----22
S 2296 PCS----23
S 2296 PCS----24
S 2296 PCS----25
S 2296 PCS----26
S 2296 PCS----27
S 2296 PCS----28
S 2296 PCS----29
S 2296 PCS----30
S 2296 PCS----31
S 2296 PCS----32
S 2296 PCS----33
S 2296 PCS----34
S 2296 PCS----35
S 2296 PCS----36
S 2296 PCS----37
S 2296 PCS----38
S 2296 PCS----39
S 2296 PCS----40
S 2296 PCS----41
S 2296 PCS----42
S 2296 PCS----43
S 2296 PCS----44
S 2296 PCS----45
S 2296 PCS----46
S 2296 PCS----47
S 2296 PCS----48