HR 3030 IH
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 3030
To establish uniform product liability standards.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
July 25, 1991
Mr. ROWLAND (for himself, Mr. LENT, Mr. GLICKMAN, Mr. FISH, Mr. HASTERT,
Mr. ALLARD, Mr. ARMEY, Mr. BALLENGER, Mr. BARNARD, Mr. BARTON of Texas,
Mr. BLILEY, Mr. BOEHLERT, Mr. BOEHNER, Mr. BROOMFIELD, Mr. BURTON of Indiana,
Mr. CAMP, Mr. CARR, Mr. CHANDLER, Mr. CLINGER, Mr. COOPER, Mr. CRANE,
Mr. DANNEMEYER, Mr. DE LUGO, Mr. DINGELL, Mr. ECKART, Mr. EDWARDS of
Oklahoma, Mr. EMERSON, Mr. FRANKS of Connecticut, Mr. GALLEGLY, Mr. GALLO,
Mr. GEKAS, Mr. GILLMOR, Mr. GINGRICH, Mr. GOODLING, Mr. GRANDY, Mr. GUNDERSON,
Mr. HANCOCK, Mr. HEFLEY, Mr. HEFNER, Mr. HENRY, Mr. HERGER, Mr. HOLLOWAY,
Mr. HOUGHTON, Mr. HUNTER, Mr. HUTTO, Mr. HYDE, Mr. INHOFE, Mr. IRELAND,
Mrs. JOHNSON of Connecticut, Mr. JONES of North Carolina, Ms. KAPTUR, Mr. KLUG,
Mr. KOLBE, Mr. KYL, Mr. LAGOMARSINO, Mr. LEWIS of Florida, Mr. MAVROULES,
Mr. MCEWEN, Mr. MCMILLAN of North Carolina, Mrs. MEYERS of Kansas, Mr. MILLER
of Ohio, Mr. MILLER of Washington, Mr. MOORHEAD, Mr. MYERS of Indiana,
Mr. OXLEY, Mr. PACKARD, Mr. PAXON, Mr. PAYNE of Virginia, Mr. PEASE, Mr. PENNY,
Mr. PETRI, Mr. PORTER, Mr. PURSELL, Mr. QUILLEN, Mr. RAVENEL, Mr. RAY,
Mr. RITTER, Mr. ROBERTS, Mr. ROTH, Mrs. ROUKEMA, Mr. SAXTON, Mr. SCHAEFER,
Mr. SHAW, Mr. SHAYS, Mr. SMITH of Texas, Mr. SOLOMON, Mr. STUMP, Mr. SUNDQUIST,
Mr. THOMAS of Georgia, Mr. UPTON, Mr. VANDER JAGT, Mr. WALKER, Mr. WALSH,
Mr. WEBER, Mr. WILSON, Mr. ZELIFF, Mr. ZIMMER, Mr. BEREUTER, Mr. TRAXLER,
and Mr. COX of California) introduced the following bill; which was referred
jointly to the Committees on the Judiciary and Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To establish uniform product liability standards.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Fairness in Product Liability Act of 1991'.
SEC. 2. PREEMPTION.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- This Act governs any product liability action brought
 in any State or Federal court against a manufacturer or product seller, or
 any theory, for harm caused by a product. A civil action brought against a
 manufacturer or product seller for commercial loss shall be governed only
 by applicable commercial or contract law.
 (b) STATE LAW- This Act supersedes State law only to the extent that this
 Act establishes a rule of law applicable to any civil action. Any issue
 that is not governed by any rule of law in this Act shall be governed by
 otherwise applicable State or Federal law.
 (c) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this Act shall be construed to--
 (1) waive or affect any defense of sovereign immunity asserted by any
 State under any law,
 (2) supersede or affect any Federal law, except the Federal Employees
 Compensation Act and the Longshoremen's and Harborworker's Compensation Act,
 (3) waive or affect any defense of sovereign immunity asserted by the
 United States,
 (4) preempt State choice-of-law rules with respect to claims brought by
 a foreign nation or a citizen of a foreign nation,
 (5) affect the right of any court to transfer venue or to apply the law of
 a foreign nation or to dismiss a claim of a foreign nation or of a citizen
 of a foreign nation on the ground of inconvenient forum, or
 (6) supersede any statute or common law which creates a cause of
 action for civil damages or civil penalties, cleanup costs, injunctions,
 restitution, cost recovery, punitive damages, or any other form of relief
 for contamination or pullution of the environment of the threat of such
 contamination or pollution.
For purposes of paragraph (7), the term `environment' has the meaning given
to such term in section 101(8) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 U.S.C. 9601(8)).
 (d) VACCINE INJURY-
 (1) To the extent that title XXI of the Public Health Service Act
 establishes a Federal rule of law applicable to a civil action brought
 for a vaccine-related injury or death--
 (A) this Act does not affect the application of the rule of law to such
 an action, and
 (B) any rule of law prescribed by this Act in conflict with a rule of law
 of such title XXI shall not apply to such an action.
 (2) If there is an aspect of a civil action brought for a vaccine-related
 injury or death to which a Federal rule of law under title XXI of the Public
 Health Service Act does not apply, then this Act or otherwise applicable law
 (as determined under this section) will apply to such aspect of such action.
SEC. 3. STANDARD OF PRODUCT SELLER LIABILITY.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Except as provided in subsection (b), in a product
 liability action, a product seller shall be liable to a claimant for harm
 only if the claimant establishes that--
 (1)(A) the product which allegedly caused the harm complained of was sold
 by the product seller, (B) the product seller failed to exercise reasonable
 care with respect to the product, and (C) such failure to exercise reasonable
 care was a proximate causes of the claimant's harm,
 (2)(A) the product seller made an express warranty applicable to the
 product which allegedly caused the harm complained of, independent of
 any express warranty made by the manufacturer as to the same product,
 (B) the product failed to conform to the warranty, (C) the failure of the
 product to conformn to the warranty caused the claimants harm, or
 (3) the product seller engaged in international wrongdoing as determined
 under applicable State law and such intentional wrongdoing was a proximate
 cause of the harm complained of by the claimant.
For purposes of paragraph (1)(B), a product seller shall not be considered
to have failed to exercise reasonable care with respect to a product based
upon an alleged failure to inspect a product where there was no reasonable
opportunity to inspect the product in a manner which would, in the exercise
of reasonable care, have revealed the aspect of the product which allegedly
caused the claimant's harm.
 (b) SPECIAL RULE- In a product liability action, a product seller shall be
 liable for harm to the claimant caused by such product as if the product
 seller were the manufacturer of such product if--
 (1) the manufacturer is not subject to service of process under the laws
 of the State in which the claimant brings the action, or
 (2) the court determines that the claimant would be unable to enforce a
 judgment against the manufacturer.
SEC. 4. ALCOHOL AND DRUG DEFENSE.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- In any product liability action, it shall be a complete
 defense to such action that--
 (1) the claimant was intoxicated or was under the influence of intoxicating
 alcohol or any drug, and
 (2) the claimant as a result of such intoxication or the influence of
 the alcohol or drug was more than 50 percent responsible for causing the
 accident or event which resulted in such claimant's harm.
 (b) CONSTRUCTION- For purposes of subsection (a)--
 (1) the determination of whether a person was intoxicated or was under
 the influence of intoxicating alcohol or any drug shall be made pursuant
 to applicable State law, and
 (2) the term `drug' means any controlled substance as defined in the
 Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802(6)) that has been taken by the
 claimant other than in accordance with the terms of a lawfully issued
 prescription.
SEC. 5. MISUSE OR ALTERATION.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- Except as provided in subsection (c), in a product
 liability action, the damages for which a manufacturer or product seller
 is otherwise liable under State law shall be reduced by the percentage of
 responsibility for the claimant's harm attributable to misuse or alteration
 of a product by any person if the manufacturer or product seller established
 by a preponderance of the evidence that such percentage of the claimant's
 harm was proximately caused by--
 (1) a use or alteration of a product in violation of, or contrary to,
 the manufacturer's or product seller's express warnings or instructions
 if the warnings or instructions are adequate as determined pursuant to
 applicable State law, or
 (2) a use or alteration of a product involving a risk of harm which was
 known or should have been known by the ordinary person who uses or consumes
 the product with the knowledge common to the class of persons who used or
 would be reasonably anticipated to use the product.
 (b) STATE LAW- Notwithstanding section 2(b) of this Act, subsection (a)
 supersedes State law concerning misuse of alteration of a product only to
 the extent that State law is inconsistent.
 (c) WORKPLACE INJURY- Notwithstanding subsection (a), the damage for which
 a manufacturer or product seller is otherwise liable under State law shall
 not be reduced by the percentage of responsibility for the claimant's harm
 attributable to misuse or alteration of the product by the claimant's
 employer or coemployees who immune for suit by the claimant pursuant to
 the State law applicable to workplace injuries.
SEC. 6. PUNITIVE DAMAGES.
 (a) General Rule-
 (1) STANDARD FOR AWARD OF DAMAGES- Except as provided in paragraph (2),
 punitive damages may, to the extent permitted by applicable State law,
 be awarded against a manufacturer or product seller in a product liability
 action if the claimant establishes by clear and convincing evidence that
 the harm suffered was the result of conduct manifesting a manufacturer's
 or product seller's conscious, flagrant indifference to the safety of
 those persons who might be harmed by a product.
 (2) REASONABLE CARE- A failure to exercise reasonable care in selecting among
 alternative product designs, formulations, instructions, or warnings shall
 not, by itself, constitute conduct that may give rise to punitive damages.
 (b) SEPARATE PROCEEDING- At the request of the manufacturer or product
 seller, the trier of fact shall consider in a separate proceeding (1)
 whether punitive damages are to be awarded and the amount of such award, or
 (2) the amount of punitive damages following a determination of liability for
 such damages. If a separate proceeding is requested, evidence relevant only
 to the claim of punitive damages, as determined by applicable State law,
 shall be inadmissible in any proceeding to determine whether compensatory
 damages are to be awarded.
 (c) CONSIDERATION- In determining the amount of punitive damages, the
 trier of fact shall consider all relevant evidence, including--
 (1) the severity of the harm caused by the conduct of the manufacturer or
 product seller,
 (2) the duration of the conduct or any concealment of it by the manufacturer
 or product seller,
 (3) the profitability of the conduct to the manufacturer or product seller,
 (4) the number of products sold by the manufacturer or product seller of
 the kind causing the harm complained of by the claimant,
 (5) awards of punitive or exemplary damages to persons similarly situated
 to the claimant,
 (6) prospective awards of compensatory damages to persons similarly situated
 to the claimant,
 (7) any criminal penalties imposed on the manufacturer or product seller
 as a result of the conduct complained of by the claimant,
 (8) the amount of any civil and administrative fines and penalties assessed
 against the defendant as a result of the conduct complained of by the
 claimant, and
 (9) whether the foregoing considerations have been presented in any prior
 proceeding involving that manufacturer or product seller.
 (d) DRUGS AND DEVICES-
 (1)(A) Punitive damages shall not be awarded against a manufacturer or
 product seller of a drug (as defined in section 201(g)(1) of the Federal
 Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321(g)(1)) or medical device (as
 defined under section 201(h) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
 (21 U.S.C. (h)) which caused the claimant's harm where--
 (i) such drug or device was subject to premarket approval by the Food
 and Drug Administration with respect to the safety of the formulation or
 performance of the aspect of such drug or device which caused the claimant's
 harm or the adequacy of the packaging or labeling of such drug or device,
 and such drug was approved by the Food and Drug Administration; or
 (ii) the drug is generally recognized as safe and effective pursuant to
 conditions established by the Food and Drug Administration and applicable
 regulations, including packaging and labeling regulations.
 (B) Subparagraphs (A) shall not apply in any case in which the defendant--
 (i) intentionally and wrongfully withheld from or misrepresented to the
 Food and Drug Administration information concerning such drug or device
 required to be submitted under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
 (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.) or section 351 of the Public Health Service Act
 (42 U.S.C. 262) that is material and relevant to the harm suffered by the
 claimant, or
 (ii) made an illegal payment to an official or employee of the Food and Drug
 Administration for the purpose of securing approval of such drug or device.
 (2) PACKAGING- In a product liability action for harm which is alleged
 to relate to the adequacy of the packaging (or labeling relating to such
 packaging) of a drug which is required to have tamper-resistant packaging
 under regulations of the Secretary of Health and Human Services (including
 labeling regulations related to such packaging), the manufacturer of the
 drug shall not be held liable for punitive damages unless the drug is
 found by the court by clear and convincing evidence to be substantially
 out of compliance with such regulations.
SEC. 7. SEVERAL LIABILITY FOR NONECONOMIC DAMAGES.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- If a manufacturer or product seller is found liable
 in a product liability action, the liability of each defendant in the
 lawsuit shall be several only and shall not be joint for the noneconomic
 damages. Each defendant shall be liable only for the amount of noneconomic
 damages allocated to such defendant in direct proportion to such defendant's
 percentage of responsibility as determined under subsection (b) of this
 section. A separate judgment shall be rendered against such defendant for
 that amount.
 (b) TRIER OF FACT- For purposes of this section, the trier of fact shall
 determine the proportion of responsibility of each party for the claimant's
 harm.
 (c) NONECONOMIC DAMAGES- As used in this section, the term `noneconomic
 damages' means subjective, nonmonetary losses including pain, suffering,
 inconvenience, mental suffering, emotional distress, loss of society and
 companionship, loss of consortium, injury to reputation and humiliation,
 but does not include objectively verifiable monetary losses including
 medical expenses, loss of earnings, burial costs, loss of use of property,
 costs of repair or replacement, costs of obtaining substitute domestic
 services, rehabilitation and training expenses, loss of employment, or
 loss of business or employment opportunities.
SEC. 8. TIME LIMITATIONS ON LIABILITY.
 (a) STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS- A product liability action shall be brought
 within 2 years after the time the individual who would be the claimant in
 such action discovered, or in the exercise of reasonable diligence should
 have discovered, the harm and its cause, except that any such action of
 a person under legal disability may be filed within 2 years after the
 disability ceases. If the commencement of such an action is stayed or
 enjoined, the running of the statute of limitations under this section
 shall be suspended for the period of the stay or injunction.
 (b) STATUTE OF REPOSE FOR CAPITAL GOODS- A product liability action for
 harm caused by a product which is a capital good shall be barred unless the
 complaint is served and filed within 25 years of the date of delivery of the
 product to its first purchaser or lessee who was not engaged in the business
 of selling or leasing the product or of using the product as a component
 in the manufacture of another product. This subsection shall apply only if--
 (1) the court determines that the claimant has received or would be eligible
 to receive compensation under any State or Federal worker's compensation
 law for harm caused by the product, and
 (2) the harm caused by the product did not include chronic illness.
SEC. 9. WORKERS' COMPENSATION OFFSET.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- In any product liability action in which damages are
 sought for harm for which the person injured is or would have been entitled
 to receive compensation under any State or Federal workers' compensation
 law, any damages awarded shall be reduced by the amount paid as workers'
 compensation benefits for such harm and the present value of all workers'
 compensation benefits to which the claimant is or would have been entitled
 for such harm. A finding with respect to the expected eligibility for or
 the amount of workers' compensation benefits in a product liability action
 shall have no binding effect on and shall not be used as evidence in any
 other proceeding.
 (b) NOTICE- A claimant in a product liability action who is or would have
 been entitled to receive compensation under any State or Federal workers'
 compensation law must provide written notice of the filing of the product
 liability action to the employer within 30 days of such filing. In the event
 the employer has ceased to exist, the claimant must provide such notice to
 the workers' compensation insurer, if any. The written notice shall include
 information regarding the date and court in which the product liability
 action was filed, the names and addresses of all plaintiffs and defendants
 appearing on the complaint, the court docket number if available, and a
 copy of the complaint which was filed in the product liability action. A
 copy of such written notice shall be filed with the court and served
 upon all parties to the action. A claimant's failure to comply with the
 requirements of this subsection shall suspend the deadlines for filing
 responsive pleadings and commencing discovery in the product liability
 action, until the claimant complies with the requirements of this subsection.
 (c) STAY OF PROCEEDINGS- In any product liability action in which damages
 are sought for harm for which the person injured is entitled to receive
 compensation under any State or Federal workers' compensation law, the action
 shall, on application of the claimant made at claimant's sole discretion,
 be stayed until such time as the full amount payable as workers' compensation
 benefits has been finally determined under such workers' compensation law.
 (d) Subrogation, Contribution, Indemnity, Lien-
 (1) GENERAL RULE- Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection,
 unless the manufacturer or product seller has expressly agreed to indemnify
 or hold an employer harmless for harm to an employee caused by a product,
 neither the employer nor the workers' compensation insurer of the employer
 shall have a right of subrogation, contribution, or implied indemnity
 against the manufacturer or product seller or a lien against the claimant's
 recovery from the manufacturer or product seller if the harm is one for
 which a product liability action may be brought pursuant to this Act.
 (2) Exceptions-
 (A) Paragraph (1) of this subsection shall not apply if the employer or the
 workers' compensation insurer of the employer establishes that the claimant's
 harm was not in any way caused by the fault of the employer or coemployees.
 (B) If the claimant's harm occurred as a result of exposure to workplace
 conditions with multiple employers and the State where workers' compensation
 is payable does not allocate payment of benefits among all responsible
 employers, paragraph (1) shall not apply if the employer or the workers'
 compensation insurer of the employer establishes that the claimant's harm was
 not in any way caused by the fault of any of such employers or coemployees.
 (C) In order to establish the exceptions in subparagraph (A) or (B) of
 this subsection, an employer or the workers' compensation insurer of the
 employer may intervene in a product liability action at any time after the
 filing of a complaint. In the event that the product liability action is
 resolved before obtaining a verdict by the trier of fact, any resolution
 of the action by settlement or other means shall afford the employer or
 the workers' compensation insurer of the employer an opportunity pursuant
 to applicable State or Federal law to participate and to assert a right
 of subrogation, contribution, or implied indemnity if the claimant's harm
 was not in any way caused by the fault of the employer or coemployees.
 (e) Tort Actions Against Employers-
 (1) GENERAL RULE- Except as provided in subsection (f), in any product
 liability action in which damages are sought for harm for which the person
 injured is or would have been entitled to receive compensation under any
 State or Federal workers' compensation law, no manufacturer or product
 seller of the product which caused the harm may maintain any action for
 implied indemnity or contribution against the employer, any coemployee,
 or the representative of the person who was injured.
 (2) EFFECT ON ACTIONS- Nothing in this Act shall be construed to affect any
 provision of a State or Federal workers' compensation law which prohibits a
 person who is or would have been entitled to receive compensation under any
 such law, or any other person whose claim is or would have been derivative
 from such a claim, from recovering for harm caused by a product in any
 action other than a workers' compensation claim against a present or former
 employer or workers' compensation insurer of the employer, any coemployee,
 or the representative of the person who was injured. Any action other than
 a claim under such a State or Federal workers' compensation law shall be
 prohibited, except that nothing in this Act shall be construed to affect
 any State or Federal workers' compensation law which permits recovery
 based on a claim of an intentional tort by the employer or coemployee,
 where the claimant's harm was caused by such an intentional tort.
 (f) NONAPPLICATION OF SUBSECTION (e)- Subsection (e) shall not apply
 and applicable State law shall control if the employer or the workers'
 compensation insurer of the employer, in a product liability action, asserts
 or attempts to assert, pursuant to subsection (d), a right of subrogation,
 contribution, or implied indemnity against the manufacturer or product
 seller or a lien against the claimant's recovery from the manufacturer or
 product seller.
SEC. 10. FEDERAL CAUSE OF ACTION PRECLUDED.
 The district courts of the United States shall not have jurisdiction under
 section 1331 or 1337 of title 28, United States Code, over any civil action
 arising under this Act.
SEC. 11. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act--
 (1) the term `capital good'--
 (A) means any product, or any component of such product, which is of a
 character subject to allowance for depreciation under the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 and is--
 (i) used in a trade or business,
 (ii) held for the production of income, or
 (iii) sold, leased, or donated to a governmental or private entity for
 the production of goods for training, for demonstration, or other similar
 purposes, and
 (B) does not mean a motor vehicle, vessel, aircraft, or railroad car used
 primarily to transport passengers for hire,
 (2) the term `claimant' means any person who brings a product liability
 action and any person on whose behalf such an action is brought, including
 such person's decedent if such an action is brought through or on behalf
 of an estate or such person's legal representative if it is brought through
 or on behalf of a minor or incompetent,
 (3) with respect to a civil action brought against a manufacturer or product
 seller of a product the term `commercial loss' means loss, including damage
 to the product itself, which is not harm described in clause (i) or (ii)
 or paragraph (4)(A) and is of a kind for which there is a remedy under
 applicable contract or commercial law,
 (4) the term `harm'--
 (A) means--
 (i) personal physical illness, injury, or death of the claimant,
 (ii) mental anguish or emotional harm of the claimant caused by or causing
 the claimant personal physical illness or injury, or
 (iii) physical damage to property other than the product itself,
caused by a product, and
 (B) does not include commercial loss,
 (5) with respect to a product, the term `manufacturer' means--
 (A) any person who is engaged in a business to produce, create, make,
 or construct the product and who designs or formulates the product or has
 engaged another person to design or formulate the product,
 (B) a product seller of the product who, before placing the product in
 the stream of commerce--
 (i) designs or formulates or has engaged another person to design or
 formulate an aspect of the product after the product was initially made
 by another, and
 (ii) produces, creates, makes, or constructs such aspect of the product, or
 (C) any product seller not described in subparagraph (B) which holds itself
 out as a manufacturer to the user of the product,
 (6) the term `product'--
 (A) means any object, substance, mixture, or raw material in a gaseous,
 liquid, or solid state--
 (i) which is capable of delivery itself, in a mixed or combined state,
 or as a component part or ingredient,
 (ii) which is produced for introduction into trade or commerce,
 (iii) which has intrinsic economic value, and
 (iv) which is intended for sale or lease to persons for commercial or
 personal use, and
 (B) does not include--
 (i) human tissue, human organs, human blood, amd human blood products, or
 (ii) electricity, water delivered by a utility, natural gas, or steam,
 (7) the term `product lability action' means a civil action brought against a
 manufacturer or product seller, on any theory, for harm caused by a product,
 (8) with respect to a product, the term `product seller'--
 (A) means a person--
 (i) who sells, distributes, leases, prepares, blends, packages, or labels
 a product or is otherwise involved in placing a product in the stream of
 commerce, or
 (ii) who installs, repairs, or maintains the harm-causing aspect of a
 product, and
 (B) does not include--
 (i) a manufacturer as defined in paragraph (5) of this section,
 (ii) a seller or lessor of real property,
 (iii) a provider of professional services in any case in which the sale
 or use of a product is incidental to the transaction and the essence of
 the transaction is the furnishing of judgment, skill, or services,
 (iv) any person who acts only in a financial capacity with respect to the
 sale of a product, or
 (v) any person who leases a product under a lease arrangement in which
 the selection, possession, maintenance, and operation of the product are
 controlled by a person other than the lessor, and
 (9) the term `State' means any State of the United States, the District
 of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam,
 American Samoa, the Northern Mariana Islands, the Trust Territory of the
 Pacific Islands, and any other territory or possession of the United States,
 or any political subdivision thereof.
SEC. 12. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 This Act shall apply with respect to product liability actions which are
 commenced after the date of the enactment of this Act.