[Congressional Bills 103th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Printing Office]
[H.R. 3960 Introduced in House (IH)]

103d CONGRESS
 2d Session
 H. R. 3960

 To provide for health care for every American and to control the cost 
 and enhance the quality of the health care system.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 March 3, 1994

Mr. Miller of California (for himself, Mr. McDermott, Mr. Becerra, Mr. 
 Clay, Mr. DeLugo, Mr. Engel, Mr. Faleomavaega, Mrs. Mink, Mr. Murphy, 
Mr. Owens, Mr. Payne of New Jersey, Mr. Romero-Barcelo, Mr. Scott, and 
 Ms. Woolsey) introduced the following bill; which was referred to the 
Committee on Energy and Commerce, Ways and Means, Armed Services, Post 
 Office and Civil Service, Natural Resources, and Education and Labor

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To provide for health care for every American and to control the cost 
 and enhance the quality of the health care system.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``American Health 
Security Act of 1994''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
 TITLE I--ESTABLISHMENT OF A STATE-BASED AMERICAN HEALTH SECURITY 
 PROGRAM; UNIVERSAL ENTITLEMENT; ENROLLMENT

Sec. 101. Establishment of a State-based American Health Security 
 Program.
Sec. 102. Universal entitlement.
Sec. 103. Enrollment.
Sec. 104. Portability of benefits.
Sec. 105. Effective date of benefits.
Sec. 106. Relationship to existing Federal health programs.
 TITLE II--COMPREHENSIVE BENEFITS, INCLUDING PREVENTIVE BENEFITS AND 
 BENEFITS FOR LONG TERM CARE

Sec. 201. Comprehensive benefits.
Sec. 202. Definitions relating to services.
Sec. 203. Special rules for home and community-based long-term care 
 services.
Sec. 204. Exclusions and limitations.
Sec. 205. Certification; quality review; plans of care.
 TITLE III--PROVIDER PARTICIPATION

Sec. 301. Provider participation and standards.
Sec. 302. Qualifications for providers.
Sec. 303. Qualifications for comprehensive health service 
 organizations.
Sec. 304. Limitation on certain physician referrals.
 TITLE IV--ADMINISTRATION

 Subtitle A--General Administrative Provisions

Sec. 401. American Health Security Standards Board.
Sec. 402. American Health Security Advisory Council.
Sec. 403. Professional, technical, and temporary advisory committees.
Sec. 404. American Health Security Quality Council.
Sec. 405. State health security programs.
Sec. 406. Complementary conduct of related health programs.
 Subtitle B--Control Over Fraud and Abuse

Sec. 411. Application of Federal sanctions to all fraud and abuse under 
 American Health Security Program.
Sec. 412. National health care fraud data base.
Sec. 413. Requirements for operation of State health care fraud and 
 abuse control units.
Sec. 414. Assignment of unique provider and patient identifiers.
 TITLE V--QUALITY ASSESSMENT

Sec. 501. Functions of Quality Council; development of practice 
 guidelines and application to outliers.
Sec. 502. State quality review programs.
Sec. 503. Elimination of existing utilization review programs; 
 transition.
Sec. 504. Development of national electronic data base.
 TITLE VI--NATIONAL HEALTH SECURITY BUDGET; PAYMENTS; COST CONTAINMENT 
 MEASURES

 Subtitle A--Budgeting and Payments to States

Sec. 601. National health security budget.
Sec. 602. Computation of individual and State capitation amounts.
Sec. 603. State health security budgets.
Sec. 604. Federal payments to States.
Sec. 605. Account for health professional education expenditures.
 Subtitle B--Payments by States to Providers

Sec. 611. Payments to hospitals and other facility-based services for 
 operating expenses on the basis of approved 
 global budgets.
Sec. 612. Payments to health care practitioners based on prospective 
 fee schedule.
Sec. 613. Payments to comprehensive health service organizations.
Sec. 614. Payments for community-based primary health services.
Sec. 615. Payments for prescription drugs.
Sec. 616. Approved devices and equipment.
Sec. 617. Payments for other items and services.
Sec. 618. Payment incentives for medically underserved areas.
Sec. 619. Authority for alternative payment methodologies.
 Subtitle C--Mandatory Assignment and Administrative Provisions

Sec. 621. Mandatory assignment.
Sec. 622. Procedures for reimbursement; appeals.
 TITLE VII--PROMOTION OF PRIMARY HEALTH CARE; DEVELOPMENT OF HEALTH 
 SERVICE CAPACITY; PROGRAMS TO ASSIST THE MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED

 Subtitle A--Promotion and Expansion of Primary Care Professional 
 Training

Sec. 701. Role of Board; establishment of primary care professional 
 output goals.
Sec. 702. Establishment of Advisory Committee on Health Professional 
 Education.
Sec. 703. Grants for health professions education, nurse education, and 
 the National Health Service Corps.
 Subtitle B--Direct Health Care Delivery

Sec. 711. Setaside for public health block grants.
Sec. 712. Setaside for primary health care delivery.
Sec. 713. Primary care service expansion grants.
 Subtitle C--Primary Care and Outcomes Research

Sec. 721. Set-aside for outcomes research.
Sec. 722. Office of Primary Care and Prevention Research.
 Subtitle D--School-Related Health Services

Sec. 731. Authorizations of appropriations.
Sec. 732. Eligibility for development and operation grants.
Sec. 733. Preferences.
Sec. 734. Grants for development of projects.
Sec. 735. Grants for operation of projects.
Sec. 736. Federal administrative costs.
Sec. 737. Definitions.
 TITLE VIII--FINANCING PROVISIONS; AMERICAN HEALTH SECURITY TRUST FUND

Sec. 800. Amendment of 1986 code; section 15 not to apply.
 Subtitle A--American Health Security Trust Fund

Sec. 801. American health security trust fund.
 Subtitle B--Taxes Based on Income and Wages

Sec. 811. Payroll tax on employers.
Sec. 812. Health care income tax.
 Subtitle C--Increase in Excise Taxes on Tobacco Products

Sec. 821. Increase in excise taxes on tobacco products.
 Subtitle D--Increase in Taxes on Firearms and Ammunition

Sec. 831. Increase in taxes on firearms and ammunition.
 TITLE IX--CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO THE EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT INCOME 
 SECURITY ACT OF 1974

Sec. 901. ERISA inapplicable to health coverage arrangements under 
 State health security programs.
Sec. 902. Exemption of State health security programs from ERISA 
 preemption.
Sec. 903. Prohibition of employee benefits duplicative of benefits 
 under State health security programs.
Sec. 903. Repeal of continuation coverage requirements under ERISA and 
 certain other requirements relating to 
 group health plans.
Sec. 904. Effective date of title.

 TITLE I--ESTABLISHMENT OF A STATE-BASED AMERICAN HEALTH SECURITY 
 PROGRAM; UNIVERSAL ENTITLEMENT; ENROLLMENT

SEC. 101. ESTABLISHMENT OF A STATE-BASED AMERICAN HEALTH SECURITY 
 PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--There is hereby established in the United States a 
State-Based American Health Security Program to be administered by the 
individual States in accordance with Federal standards specified in, or 
established under, this Act.
 (b) State Health Security Programs.--In order for a State to be 
eligible to receive payment under section 604, a State must establish a 
State health security program in accordance with this Act.
 (c) State Defined.--
 (1) In general.--In this Act, subject to paragraph (2), the 
 term ``State'' means each of the fifty States and the District 
 of Columbia.
 (2) Election.--If the Governor of Puerto Rico, the Virgin 
 Islands, Guam, American Samoa, or the Northern Mariana Islands 
 certifies to the President that the legislature of the 
 Commonwealth or territory has enacted legislation desiring that 
 the Commonwealth or territory be included as a State under the 
 provisions of this Act, such Commonwealth or territory shall be 
 included as a ``State'' under this Act beginning January 1 of 
 the first year beginning ninety days after the President 
 receives the notification.

SEC. 102. UNIVERSAL ENTITLEMENT.

 (a) In General.--Every individual who is a resident of the United 
States and is a citizen or national of the United States or lawful 
resident alien (as defined in subsection (d) is entitled to benefits 
for health care services under this Act under the appropriate State 
health security program. In this section, the term ``appropriate State 
health security program'' means, with respect to an individual, the 
State health security program for the State in which the individual 
maintains a primary residence.
 (b) Treatment of Certain Nonimmigrants.--
 (1) In general.--The American Health Security Standards 
 Board (in this Act referred to as the ``Board'') may make 
 eligible for benefits for health care services under the 
 appropriate State health security program under this Act such 
 classes of aliens admitted to the United States as 
 nonimmigrants as the Board may provide.
 (2) Consideration.--In providing for eligibility under 
 paragraph (1), the Board shall consider reciprocity in health 
 care services offered to United States citizens who are 
 nonimmigrants in other foreign states, and such other factors 
 as the Board determines to be appropriate.
 (c) Treatment of Other Individuals.--
 (1) By board.--The Board also may make eligible for 
 benefits for health care services under the appropriate State 
 health security program under this Act other individuals not 
 described in subsection (a) or (b), and regulate the nature of 
 the eligibility of such individuals, in order--
 (A) to preserve the public health of communities,
 (B) to compensate States for the additional health 
 care financing burdens created by such individuals, and
 (C) to prevent adverse financial and medical 
 consequences of uncompensated care,
 while inhibiting travel and immigration to the United States 
 for the sole purpose of obtaining health care services.
 (2) By states.--Any State health security program may make 
 individuals described in paragraph (1) eligible for benefits at 
 the expense of the State.
 (d) Lawful Resident Alien Defined.--For purposes of this section, 
the term ``lawful resident alien'' means an alien lawfully admitted for 
permanent residence and any other alien lawfully residing permanently 
in the United States under color of law, including an alien with lawful 
temporary resident status under section 210, 210A, or 234A of the 
Immigration and Nationality Act (8 U.S.C. 1160, 1161, or 1255a).

SEC. 103. ENROLLMENT.

 (a) In General.--Each State health security program shall provide a 
mechanism for the enrollment of individuals entitled or eligible for 
benefits under this Act. The mechanism shall--
 (1) include a process for the automatic enrollment of 
 individuals at the time of birth in the United States and at 
 the time of immigration into the United States or other 
 acquisition of lawful resident status in the United States,
 (2) provide for the enrollment, as of January 1, 1996, of 
 all individuals who are eligible to be enrolled as of such 
 date, and
 (3) include a process for the enrollment of individuals 
 made eligible for health care services under subsections (b) 
 and (c) of section 102.
 (b) Availability of Applications.--Each State health security 
program shall make applications for enrollment under the program 
available--
 (1) at employment and payroll offices of employers located 
 in the State,
 (2) at local offices of the Social Security Administration,
 (3) at social services locations,
 (4) at out-reach sites (such as provider and practitioner 
 locations), and
 (5) at other locations (including post offices and schools) 
 accessible to a broad cross-section of individuals eligible to 
 enroll.
 (c) Issuance of Health Security Cards.--In conjunction with an 
individual's enrollment for benefits under this Act, the State health 
security program shall provide for the issuance of a health security 
card which shall be used for purposes of identification and processing 
of claims for benefits under the program. The State health security 
program may provide for issuance of such cards by employers for 
purposes of carrying out enrollment pursuant to subsection (a)(2).

SEC. 104. PORTABILITY OF BENEFITS.

 (a) In General.--To ensure continuous access to benefits for health 
care services covered under this Act, each State health security 
program--
 (1) shall not impose any minimum period of residence in the 
 State, or waiting period, in excess of three months before 
 residents of the State are entitled to, or eligible for, such 
 benefits under the program;
 (2) shall provide continuation of payment for covered 
 health care services to individuals who have terminated their 
 residence in the State and established their residence in 
 another State, for the duration of any waiting period imposed 
 in the State of new residency for establishing entitlement to, 
 or eligibility for, such services; and
 (3) shall provide for the payment for health care services 
 covered under this Act provided to individuals while 
 temporarily absent from the State based on the following 
 principles:
 (A) Payment for such health care services is at the 
 rate that is approved by the State health security 
 program in the State in which the services are 
 provided, unless the States concerned agree to 
 apportion the cost between them in a different manner.
 (B) Payment for such health care services provided 
 outside the United States is made on the basis of the 
 amount that would have been paid by the State health 
 security program for similar services rendered in the 
 State, with due regard, in the case of hospital 
 services, to the size of the hospital, standards of 
 service, and other relevant factors.
 (b) Cross-border Arrangements.--A State health security program for 
a State may negotiate with such a program in an adjacent State a 
reciprocal arrangement for the coverage under such other program of 
health care services to enrollees residing in the border region.

SEC. 105. EFFECTIVE DATE OF BENEFITS.

 Benefits shall first be available under this Act for items and 
services furnished on or after January 1, 1996.

SEC. 106. RELATIONSHIP TO EXISTING FEDERAL HEALTH PROGRAMS.

 (a) Medicare and Medicaid.--
 (1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 law, subject to paragraph (2)--
 (A) no benefits shall be available under title 
 XVIII of the Social Security Act for any item or 
 service furnished after December 31, 1995,
 (B) no individual is entitled to medical assistance 
 under a State plan approved under title XIX of such Act 
 for any item or service furnished after such date, and
 (C) no payment shall be made to a State under 
 section 1903(a) of such Act with respect to medical 
 assistance for any item or service furnished after such 
 date.
 (2) Transition.--In the case of inpatient hospital services 
 and extended care services during a continuous period of stay 
 which began before January 1, 1996, and which had not ended as 
 of such date, for which benefits are provided under title 
 XVIII, or under a State plan under title XIX, of the Social 
 Security Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services and 
 each State plan, respectively, shall provide for continuation 
 of benefits under such title or plan until the end of the 
 period of stay.
 (b) Federal Employees Health Benefits Program.--No benefits shall 
be made available under chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code, for 
any part of a coverage period occurring after December 31, 1995.
 (c) CHAMPUS.--No benefits shall be made available under sections 
1079 and 1086 of title 10, United States Code, for items or services 
furnished after December 31, 1995.
 (d) Treatment of Benefits for Veterans and Native Americans.--
Nothing in this Act shall affect the eligibility of veterans for the 
medical benefits and services provided under title 38, United States 
Code, or of Indians for the medical benefits and services provided by 
or through the Indian Health Service.

 TITLE II--COMPREHENSIVE BENEFITS, INCLUDING PREVENTIVE BENEFITS AND 
 BENEFITS FOR LONG TERM CARE

SEC. 201. COMPREHENSIVE BENEFITS.

 (a) In General.--Subject to the succeeding provisions of this 
title, individuals enrolled for benefits under this Act are entitled to 
have payment made under a State health security program for the 
following items and services if medically necessary or appropriate for 
the maintenance of health or for the diagnosis, treatment, or 
rehabilitation of a health condition:
 (1) Hospital services.--Inpatient and outpatient hospital 
 care, including 24-hour a day emergency services.
 (2) Professional services.--Professional services of health 
 care practitioners authorized to provide health care services 
 under State law.
 (3) Community-based primary health services.--Community-
 based primary health services (as defined in section 202(a)).
 (4) Preventive services.--Preventive services (as defined 
 in section 202(b)).
 (5) Long-term and chronic care services.--
 (A) Nursing facility services.
 (B) Home health services.
 (C) Home and community-based long term care 
 services (as defined in section 202(c)) for individuals 
 described in section 203(a).
 (D) Hospice care.
 (6) Prescription drugs, biologicals, insulin, medical 
 foods.--
 (A) Outpatient prescription drugs and biologicals, 
 as specified by the Board consistent with section 515.
 (B) Insulin.
 (C) Medical foods (as defined in section 202(d)).
 (7) Dental services.--Dental services (as defined in 
 section 202(h)).
 (8) Mental health services.--Mental health services (as 
 defined in section 202(e)).
 (9) Substance abuse treatment services.--Substance abuse 
 treatment services (as defined in section 202(f)).
 (10) Diagnostic tests.--Diagnostic tests.
 (11) Other items and services.--
 (A) Outpatient therapy.--Outpatient physical 
 therapy services, outpatient speech pathology services, 
 and outpatient occupational therapy services in all 
 settings.
 (B) Durable medical equipment.--Durable medical 
 equipment.
 (C) Home dialysis.--Home dialysis supplies and 
 equipment.
 (D) Ambulance.--Emergency ambulance service.
 (E) Prosthetic devices.--Prosthetic devices, 
 including replacements of such devices.
 (F) Additional items and services.--Such other 
 medical or health care items or services as the Board 
 may specify.
 (b) Cost-Sharing.--There are no deductibles, coinsurance, or 
copayments applicable to acute care and preventive benefits provided 
under this title.
 (c) Prohibition of Balance Billing.--As provided in section 531, no 
person may impose a charge for covered services for which benefits are 
provided under this Act.
 (d) No Duplicate Health Insurance.--Each State health security 
program shall prohibit the sale of health insurance in the State if 
payment under the insurance duplicates payment for any items or 
services for which payment may be made under such a program.
 (e) State Program May Provide Additional Benefits.--Nothing in this 
Act shall be construed as limiting the benefits that may be made 
available under a State health security program to residents of the 
State at the expense of the State.
 (f) Employers May Provide Additional Benefits.--Nothing in this Act 
shall be construed as limiting the additional benefits that an employer 
may provide to employees or their dependents, or to former employees or 
their dependents.

SEC. 202. DEFINITIONS RELATING TO SERVICES.

 (a) Community-Based Primary Health Services.--In this title, the 
term ``community-based primary health services'' means ambulatory 
health services furnished--
 (1) by a rural health clinic;
 (2) by a Federally-qualified health center, and which, for 
 purposes of this Act, include services furnished by State and 
 local health agencies;
 (3) in a school-based setting;
 (4) by public educational agencies and other providers of 
 services to children entitled to assistance under the 
 Individuals with Disabilities Education Act for services 
 furnished pursuant to a written Individualized Family Services 
 Plan or Individual Education Plan under such Act; and
 (5) public and private non-profit entities receiving 
 Federal assistance under the Public Health Service Act.
 (b) Preventive Services.--
 (1) In general.--In this title, the term ``preventive 
 services'' means items and services--
 (A) which--
 (i) are specified in paragraph (2), or
 (ii) the Board determines to be effective 
 in the maintenance and promotion of health or 
 minimizing the effect of illness, disease, or 
 medical condition; and
 (B) which are provided consistent with the 
 periodicity schedule established under paragraph (3).
 (2) Specified preventive services.--The services specified 
 in this paragraph are as follows:
 (A) Basic immunizations.
 (B) Prenatal and well-baby care (for infants under 
 one year of age).
 (C) Well-child care (including periodic physical 
 examinations, hearing and vision screening, and 
 developmental screening and examinations) for 
 individuals under 18 years of age.
 (D) Periodic screening mammography, Pap smears, and 
 colorectal examinations and examinations for prostate 
 cancer.
 (E) Physical examinations.
 (F) Family planning services.
 (G) Routine eye examinations, eyeglasses, and 
 contact lenses.
 (H) Hearing aids, but only upon a determination of 
 a certified audiologist or physician that a hearing 
 problem exists and is caused by a condition that can be 
 corrected by use of a hearing aid.
 (3) Schedule.--The Board shall establish, in consultation 
 with experts in preventive medicine and public health and 
 taking into consideration those preventive services recommended 
 by the Preventive Services Task Force and published as the 
 Guide to Clinical Preventive Services, a periodicity schedule 
 for the coverage of preventive services under paragraph (1). 
 Such schedule shall take into consideration the cost-
 effectiveness of appropriate preventive care and shall be 
 revised not less frequently than once every 5 years, in 
 consultation with experts in preventive medicine and public 
 health.
 (c) Home and Community-based Long-Term Care Services.--In this 
title, the term ``home and community-based long term care services'' 
means the following services provided to an individual to enable the 
individual to remain in such individual's place of residence within the 
community:
 (1) Homemaker services, including meals.
 (2) Home health aide services.
 (3) Adult day health care, social day care or psychiatric 
 day care.
 (4) Medical social work services.
 (5) Care coordination services, as defined in subsection 
 (g)(1).
 (6) Respite care, including training for informal 
 caregivers.
 (d) Medical Foods.--In this title, the term ``medical foods'' means 
foods which are formulated to be consumed or administered enterally 
under the supervision of a physician and which are intended for the 
specific dietary management of a disease or condition for which 
distinctive nutritional requirements, based on recognized scientific 
principles, are established by medical evaluation.
 (e) Mental Health Services.--In this title, the term ``mental 
health services'' means services related to the prevention, diagnosis, 
treatment, and rehabilitation of mental illness and promotion of mental 
health, including the following services:
 (1) Crisis intervention.
 (2) Outpatient mental health services.
 (3) Partial hospitalization and day and evening treatment 
 programs.
 (4) Psychosocial rehabilitation services.
 (5) Pharmacotherapeutic interventions.
 (6) Other rehabilitation services, including halfway and 
 three-quarter-way house care.
 (7) Inpatient mental health services.
 (8) Care coordination services (as defined in subsection 
 (g)(1)).
 (f) Substance Abuse Treatment Services.--In this title, the term 
``substance abuse treatment services'' means services for the treatment 
of dependency on alcohol or controlled substances provided through a 
treatment program meeting State qualification standards and includes 
the following services:
 (1) Crisis intervention, including assessment, diagnosis, 
 and referral.
 (2) Detoxification services, in ambulatory and inpatient 
 settings.
 (3) Outpatient services, including intensive day and 
 evening programs, continuing care, and family services.
 (4) Short-term residential services in a hospital or free-
 standing program.
 (5) Long-term residential services, including therapeutic 
 communities and halfway houses.
 (6) Pharmacotherapeutic interventions.
 (7) Care coordination services (as defined in subsection 
 (g)(1)).
 (g) Care Coordination Services.--
 (1) In general.--In this title, the term ``care 
 coordination services'' means services provided by care 
 coordinators (as defined in paragraph (2)) to individuals 
 described in paragraph (3) for the coordination and monitoring 
 of mental health services, substance abuse treatment services, 
 and home and community-based long term care services to ensure 
 appropriate, cost-effective utilization of such services in a 
 comprehensive and continuous manner, and includes--
 (A) transition management between inpatient 
 facilities and community-based services, including 
 assisting patients in identifying and gaining access to 
 appropriate ancillary services; and
 (B) evaluating and recommending appropriate 
 treatment services, in cooperation with patients and 
 other providers and in conjunction with any quality 
 review program or plan of care under section 205.
 (2) Care coordinator.--
 (A) In general.--In this title, the term ``care 
 coordinator'' means an individual or nonprofit or 
 public agency or organization which the State health 
 security program determines--
 (i) is capable of performing directly, 
 efficiently, and effectively the duties of a 
 care coordinator described in paragraph (1), 
 and
 (ii) demonstrates capability in 
 establishing and periodically reviewing and 
 revising plans of care, and in arranging for 
 and monitoring the provision and quality of 
 services under any plan.
 (B) Independence.--State health security programs 
 shall establish safeguards to assure that care 
 coordinators have no financial interest in treatment 
 decisions or placements. Care coordination may not be 
 provided through any structure or mechanism through 
 which quality review is performed.
 (3) Eligible individuals.--An individual described in this 
 paragraph is an individual--
 (A) described in section 203 (relating to 
 individuals qualifying for long term and chronic care 
 services); or
 (B) determined (in a manner specified by the 
 Board)--
 (i) to have a serious mental illness (as 
 defined by the Board), or
 (ii) to have a history of substance abuse 
 displaying severe associated illness or 
 previous treatment failure (as defined by the 
 Board).
 (h) Dental Services.--In this title, the term ``dental services'' 
means preventive and prophylactic dental treatment consistent with a 
periodicity schedule established by the Board and treatment for dental 
disease and injury in children under 18 years of age, and does not 
include orthodontic services.
 (i) Nursing facility; nursing facility services.--Except as may be 
provided by the Board, the terms ``nursing facility'' and ``nursing 
facility services'' have the meanings given such terms in sections 
1919(a) and 1905(f), respectively, of the Social Security Act.
 (j) Other Terms.--Except as may be provided by the Board, the 
definitions contained in section 1861 of the Social Security Act shall 
apply.

SEC. 203. SPECIAL RULES FOR HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED LONG-TERM CARE 
 SERVICES.

 (a) Qualifying Individuals.--For purposes of section 201(a)(5)(C), 
individuals described in this subsection are the following individuals:
 (1) Adults.--Individuals 18 years of age or older 
 determined (in a manner specified by the Board)--
 (A) to be unable to perform, without the assistance 
 of an individual, at least 2 of the following 5 
 activities of daily living (or who has a similar level 
 of disability due to cognitive impairment)--
 (i) bathing;
 (ii) eating;
 (iii) dressing;
 (iv) toileting; and
 (v) transferring in and out of a bed or in 
 and out of a chair; or
 (B) due to cognitive or mental impairments, 
 requires supervision because the individual behaves in 
 a manner that poses health or safety hazards to himself 
 or herself or others.
 (2) Children.--Individuals under 18 years of age determined 
 (in a manner specified by the Board) to meet such alternative 
 standard of disability for children as the Board develops.
 (b) Limit on Services.--
 (1) In general.--No individual is entitled to receive 
 benefits under a State health security program with respect to 
 home and community-based long term care services in a period 
 (specified by the Board) to the extent the amount of payments 
 for such benefits exceeds 65 percent (or such alternative ratio 
 as the Board establishes under paragraph (2)) of the average of 
 amount of payment that would have been made under the program 
 during the period if the individual were a resident of a 
 nursing facility in the same area in which the services were 
 provided.
 (2) Alternative ratio.--The Board may establish for 
 purposes of paragraph (1) an alternative ratio (of payments for 
 home and community-based long term care services to payments 
 for nursing facility services) as the Board determines to be 
 more consistent with the goal of providing cost-effective long-
 term care in the most appropriate and least restrictive 
 setting.

SEC. 204. EXCLUSIONS AND LIMITATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Subject to section 201(e), benefits for service 
are not available under this Act unless the services meet the standards 
specified in section 201(a).
 (b) Mental Health Services and Substance Abuse Treatment 
Services.--
 (1) In general.--Mental health services and substance abuse 
 treatment services furnished for an individual in excess of a 
 threshold specified in paragraph (2) are not covered services 
 unless the services are determined under a utilization review 
 program to meet the standards specified in section 201(a) and, 
 with respect to inpatient or residential treatment services, to 
 be provided in the least restrictive and most appropriate 
 setting.
 (2) Utilization review threshold.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraphs (B) and 
 (C), the thresholds specified in this paragraph are--
 (i) 20 outpatient visits in a year, and
 (ii) 15 days of inpatient services in a 
 year.
 (B) Alternative national thresholds.--The Board may 
 specify alternative thresholds to those specified in 
 subparagraph (A).
 (C) Additional state thresholds.--A State health 
 security program may specify thresholds in addition to 
 those established under the previous subparagraphs, 
 which thresholds may be higher or lower than the number 
 of outpatient visits or days of inpatient services 
 otherwise specified.
 (c) Treatment of Experimental Services.--In applying subsection 
(a), the Board shall make, after consultation with a technical advisory 
committee, national coverage determinations with respect to those 
services that are experimental in nature. Such determinations shall be 
made consistent with a process that provides for professional input and 
public comment.
 (d) Application of National Practice Guidelines.--In the case of 
services for which the Board has recognized national practice 
guidelines, the services are considered to meet the standards specified 
in section 201(a) only if they have been provided in accordance with 
such guidelines or in accordance with such guidelines as are provided 
by the State health security program consistent with title V.
 (e) Specific Limitations.--
 (1) Limitations on eyeglasses, contact lenses, hearing 
 aids, and durable medical equipment.--Subject to section 
 201(e), the Board may impose such limits relating to the costs 
 and frequency of replacement of eyeglasses, contact lenses, 
 hearing aids, and durable medical equipment to which 
 individuals enrolled for benefits under this Act are entitled 
 to have payment made under a State health security program as 
 the Board deems appropriate.
 (2) Overlap with preventive services.--The coverage of 
 services described in section 201(a) (other than paragraph (3)) 
 which also are preventive services are required to be covered 
 only to the extent that they are required to be covered as 
 preventive services.
 (3) Miscellaneous exclusions from covered services.--
 Covered services under this Act do not include the following:
 (A) Surgery and other procedures (such as 
 orthodontia) performed solely for cosmetic purposes (as 
 defined in regulations) and hospital or other services 
 incident thereto, unless--
 (i) required to correct a congenital 
 anomaly;
 (ii) required to restore or correct a part 
 of the body which has been altered as a result 
 of accidental injury, disease, or surgery; or
 (iii) otherwise determined to be medically 
 necessary and appropriate under section 201(a).
 (B) Personal comfort items or private rooms in 
 inpatient facilities, unless determined to be medically 
 necessary and appropriate under section 201(a).
 (C) The services of a professional practitioner if 
 they are furnished in a hospital or other facility 
 which is not a participating provider.
 (f) Nursing Facility Services and Home Health Services.--Nursing 
facility services and home health services (other than post-hospital 
services, as defined by the Board) furnished to an individual who is 
not described in section 203(a) are not covered services unless the 
services are determined to meet the standards specified in section 
201(a) and, with respect to nursing facility services, to be provided 
in the least restrictive and most appropriate setting.

SEC. 205. CERTIFICATION; QUALITY REVIEW; PLANS OF CARE.

 (a) Certifications.--State health security programs may require, as 
a condition of payment for institutional health care services and other 
services of the type described in such sections 1814(a) and 1835(a) of 
the Social Security Act, periodic professional certifications of the 
kind described in such sections.
 (b) Quality Review.--For requirement that each State health 
security program establish a quality review program that meets the 
requirements for such a program under title V, see section 
405(b)(1)(H).
 (c) Plan of Care Requirements.--A State health security program may 
require, consistent with standards established by the Board, that 
payment for services exceeding specified levels or duration be provided 
only as consistent with a plan of care or treatment formulated by one 
or more providers of the services or other qualified professionals. 
Such a plan may include, consistent with subsection (b), case 
management at specified intervals as a further condition of payment for 
services.

 TITLE III--PROVIDER PARTICIPATION

SEC. 301. PROVIDER PARTICIPATION AND STANDARDS.

 (a) In General.--An individual or other entity furnishing any 
covered service under a State health security program under this Act is 
not a qualified provider unless the individual or entity--
 (1) is a qualified provider of the services under section 
 302;
 (2) has filed with the State health security program a 
 participation agreement described in subsection (b); and
 (3) meets such other qualifications and conditions as are 
 established by the Board or the State health security program 
 under this Act.
 (b) Requirements in Participation Agreement.--
 (1) In general.--A participation agreement described in 
 this subsection between a State health security program and a 
 provider shall provide at least for the following:
 (A) Services to eligible persons will be furnished 
 by the provider without discrimination on the ground of 
 race, national origin, income, religion, age, sex or 
 sexual orientation, disability, handicapping condition, 
 or (subject to the professional qualifications of the 
 provider) illness. Nothing in this subparagraph shall 
 be construed as requiring the provision of a type or 
 class of services which services are outside the scope 
 of the provider's normal practice.
 (B) No charge will be made for any covered services 
 other than for payment authorized by this Act.
 (C) The provider agrees to furnish such information 
 as may be reasonably required by the Board or a State 
 health security program, in accordance with uniform 
 reporting standards established under section 
 401(g)(1), for--
 (i) quality review by designated entities;
 (ii) the making of payments under this Act 
 (including the examination of records as may be 
 necessary for the verification of information 
 on which payments are based);
 (iii) statistical or other studies required 
 for the implementation of this Act; and
 (iv) such other purposes as the Board or 
 State may specify.
 (D) The provider agrees not to bill the program for 
 any services for which benefits are not available 
 because of section 204(d).
 (E) In the case of a provider that is not an 
 individual, the provider agrees not to employ or use 
 for the provision of health services any individual or 
 other provider who or which has had a participation 
 agreement under this subsection terminated for cause.
 (F) In the case of a provider paid under a fee-for-
 service basis under section 612, the provider agrees to 
 submit bills and any required supporting documentation 
 relating to the provision of covered services within 30 
 days (or such shorter period as a State health security 
 program may require) after the date of providing such 
 services.
 (2) Termination of participation agreements.--
 (A) In general.--Participation agreements may be 
 terminated, with appropriate notice--
 (i) by the Board or a State health security 
 program for failure to meet the requirements of 
 this title, or
 (ii) by a provider.
 (B) Termination process.--Providers shall be 
 provided notice and a reasonable opportunity to correct 
 deficiencies before the Board or a State health 
 security program terminates an agreement unless a more 
 immediate termination is required for public safety or 
 similar reasons.

SEC. 302. QUALIFICATIONS FOR PROVIDERS.

 (a) In General.--A health care provider is considered to be 
qualified to provide covered services if the provider is licensed or 
certified and meets--
 (1) all the requirements of State law to provide such 
 services,
 (2) applicable requirements of Federal law to provide such 
 services, and
 (3) any applicable standards established under subsection 
 (b).
 (b) Minimum Provider Standards.--
 (1) In general.--The Board shall establish, evaluate, and 
 update national minimum standards to assure the quality of 
 services provided under this Act and to monitor efforts by 
 State health security programs to assure the quality of such 
 services. A State health security program may also establish 
 additional minimum standards which providers must meet.
 (2) National minimum standards.--The national minimum 
 standards under paragraph (1) shall be established for 
 institutional providers of services, individual health care 
 practitioners, and comprehensive health service organizations. 
 Except as the Board may specify in order to carry out this 
 title, a hospital, nursing facility, or other institutional 
 provider of services shall meet standards for such a facility 
 under the medicare program under title XVIII of the Social 
 Security Act. Such standards also may include, where 
 appropriate, elements relating to--
 (A) adequacy and quality of facilities;
 (B) training and competence of personnel (including 
 continuing education requirements);
 (C) comprehensiveness of service;
 (D) continuity of service;
 (E) patient satisfaction (including waiting time 
 and access to services); and
 (F) performance standards (including organization, 
 facilities, structure of services, efficiency of 
 operation, and outcome in palliation, improvement of 
 health, stabilization, cure, or rehabilitation).
 (3) Transition in application.--If the Board provides for 
 additional requirements for providers under this subsection, 
 any such additional requirement shall be implemented in a 
 manner that provides for a reasonable period during which a 
 previously qualified provider is permitted to meet such an 
 additional requirement.
 (4) Exchange of information.--The Board shall provide for 
 an exchange, at least annually, among State health security 
 programs of information with respect to quality assurance and 
 cost containment.

SEC. 303. QUALIFICATIONS FOR COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH SERVICE 
 ORGANIZATIONS.

 (a) In General.--For purposes of this Act, a comprehensive health 
service organization (in this section referred to as a ``CHSO'') is a 
public or private organization which, in return for a capitated payment 
amount, undertakes to furnish, arrange for the provision of, or provide 
payment with respect to--
 (1) a full range of health services (as identified by the 
 Board), including at least hospital services and physicians 
 services, and
 (2) out-of-area coverage in the case of urgently needed 
 services,
to an identified population which is living in or near a specified 
service area and which enrolls voluntarily in the organization.
 (b) Enrollment.--
 (1) In general.--All eligible persons living in or near the 
 specified service area of a CHSO are eligible to enroll in the 
 organization; except that the number of enrollees may be 
 limited to avoid overtaxing the resources of the organization.
 (2) Minimum enrollment period.--Subject to paragraph (3), 
 the minimum period of enrollment with a CHSO shall be twelve 
 months, unless the enrolled individual becomes ineligible to 
 enroll with the organization.
 (3) Withdrawal for cause.--Each CHSO shall permit an 
 enrolled individual to disenroll from the organization for 
 cause at any time.
 (c) Requirements for CHSOs.--
 (1) Accessible services.--Each CHSO, to the maximum extent 
 feasible, shall make all services readily and promptly 
 accessible to enrollees who live in the specified service area.
 (2) Continuity of care.--Each CHSO shall furnish services 
 in such manner as to provide continuity of care and (when 
 services are furnished by different providers) shall provide 
 ready referral of patients to such services and at such times 
 as may be medically appropriate.
 (3) Board of directors.--In the case of a CHSO that is a 
 private organization--
 (A) Consumer representation.--At least one-third of 
 the members of the CHSO's board of directors must be 
 consumer members with no direct or indirect, personal 
 or family financial relationship to the organization.
 (B) Provider representation.--The CHSO's board of 
 directors must include at least one member who 
 represents health care providers.
 (4) Patient grievance program.--Each CHSO must have in 
 effect a patient grievance program and must conduct regularly 
 surveys of the satisfaction of members with services provided 
 by or through the organization.
 (5) Medical standards.--Each CHSO must provide that a 
 committee or committees of health care practitioners associated 
 with the organization will promulgate medical standards, 
 oversee the professional aspects of the delivery of care, 
 perform the functions of a pharmacy and drug therapeutics 
 committee, and monitor and review the quality of all health 
 services (including drugs, education, and preventive services).
 (6) Premiums.--Premiums or other charges by a CHSO for any 
 services not paid for under this Act must be reasonable.
 (7) Utilization and bonus information.--Each CHSO must--
 (A) comply with the requirements of section 
 1876(i)(8) of the Social Security Act (relating to 
 prohibiting physician incentive plans that provide 
 specific inducements to reduce or limit medically 
 necessary services), and
 (B) make available to its membership utilization 
 information and data regarding financial performance, 
 including bonus or incentive payment arrangements to 
 practitioners.
 (8) Provision of services to enrollees at institutions 
 operating under global budgets.--The organization shall arrange 
 to reimburse for hospital services and other facility-based 
 services (as identified by the Board) for services provided to 
 members of the organization in accordance with the global 
 operating budget of the hospital or facility approved under 
 section 611.
 (9) Broad marketing.--Each CHSO must provide for the 
 marketing of its services (including dissemination of marketing 
 materials) to potential enrollees in a manner that is designed 
 to enroll individuals representative of the different 
 population groups and geographic areas included within its 
 service area and meets such requirements as the Board or a 
 State health security program may specify.
 (10) Additional requirements.--Each CHSO must meet--
 (A) such requirements relating to minimum 
 enrollment,
 (B) such requirements relating to financial 
 solvency,
 (C) such requirements relating to quality and 
 availability of care, and
 (D) such other requirements,
 as the Board or a State health security program may specify.
 (d) Provision of Emergency Services to Nonenrollees.--A CHSO may 
furnish emergency services to persons who are not enrolled in the 
organization. Payment for such services, if they are covered services 
to eligible persons, shall be made to the organization unless the 
organization requests that it be made to the individual provider who 
furnished the services.

SEC. 304. LIMITATION ON CERTAIN PHYSICIAN REFERRALS.

 (a) Application to American Health Security Program.--Section 1877 
of the Social Security Act, as amended by subsections (b) and (c), 
shall apply under this Act in the same manner as it applies under title 
XVIII of the Social Security Act; except that in applying such section 
under this Act any references in such section to the Secretary or title 
XVIII of the Social Security Act are deemed references to the Board and 
the American Health Security Program under this Act, respectively.
 (b) Expansion of Prohibition to Certain Designated Services.--
Section 1877 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395nn) is amended--
 (1) by striking ``clinical laboratory services'' and 
 ``clinical laboratory services'' and inserting ``designated 
 health services'' and ``designated health services'', 
 respectively, each place either appears in subsections (a)(1), 
 (b)(2)(A)(ii)(I), (b)(4), (d)(1), (d)(2), and (d)(3);
 (2) by adding at the end of such section the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(i) Designated Health Services Defined.--In this section, the 
term `designated health services' means--
 ``(1) clinical laboratory services;
 ``(2) physical therapy services;
 ``(3) radiology services, including magnetic resonance 
 imaging, computerized axial tomography scans, and ultrasound 
 services;
 ``(4) radiation therapy services;
 ``(5) the furnishing of durable medical equipment;
 ``(6) the furnishing of parenteral and enteral nutrition 
 equipment and supplies;
 ``(7) the furnishing of outpatient prescription drugs;
 ``(8) ambulance services;
 ``(9) home infusion therapy services;
 ``(10) occupational therapy services; and
 ``(11) inpatient and outpatient hospital services 
 (including services furnished at a psychiatric or 
 rehabilitation hospital).'';
 (3) in subsection (d)(2), by striking ``laboratory'' and by 
 inserting ``entity'';
 (4) in subsection (g)(1), by striking ``clinical laboratory 
 service'' and by inserting ``designated health service''; and
 (5) in subsection (h)(7)(B), by striking ``clinical 
 laboratory service'' and by inserting ``designated health 
 service''.
 (c) Conforming Amendments.--Such section is further amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1)(A), by striking ``for which 
 payment otherwise may be made under this title'' and by 
 inserting ``for which a charge is imposed'';
 (2) in subsection (a)(1)(B), by striking ``under this 
 title'';
 (3) by amending paragraph (1) of subsection (g) to read as 
 follows:
 ``(1) Denial of payment.--No payment may be made under a 
 State health security program for a designated health service 
 for which a claim is presented in violation of subsection 
 (a)(1)(B). No individual, third party payor, or other entity is 
 liable for payment for designated health services for which a 
 claim is presented in violation of such subsection.''; and
 (4) In subsection (g)(3), by striking ``for which payment 
 may not be made under paragraph (1)'' and by inserting ``for 
 which such a claim may not be presented under subsection 
 (a)(1)''.

 TITLE IV--ADMINISTRATION

 Subtitle A--General Administrative Provisions

SEC. 401. AMERICAN HEALTH SECURITY STANDARDS BOARD.

 (a) Establishment.--There is hereby established an American Health 
Security Standards Board.
 (b) Appointment and Terms of Members.--
 (1) In general.--The Board shall be composed of--
 (A) the Secretary of Health and Human Services, and
 (B) 6 other individuals (described in paragraph 
 (2)) appointed by the President with the advice and 
 consent of the Senate.
 The President shall first nominate individuals under 
 subparagraph (B) on a timely basis so as to provide for the 
 operation of the Board by not later than January 1, 1995.
 (2) Selection of appointed members.--With respect to the 
 individuals appointed under paragraph (1)(B):
 (A) They shall be chosen on the basis of 
 backgrounds in health policy, health economics, the 
 healing professions, and the administration of health 
 care institutions.
 (B) They shall provide a balanced point of view 
 with respect to the various health care interests and 
 at least two of them shall represent the interests of 
 individual consumers.
 (C) Not more than three of them shall be from the 
 same political party.
 (3) Terms of appointed members.--Individuals appointed 
 under paragraph (1)(B) shall serve for a term of 6 years, 
 except that the terms of 5 of the individuals initially 
 appointed shall be, as designated by the President at the time 
 of their appointment, for 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 years. During a 
 term of membership on the Board, no member shall engage in any 
 other business, vocation or employment.
 (c) Vacancies.--
 (1) In general.--The President shall fill any vacancy in 
 the membership of the Board in the same manner as the original 
 appointment. The vacancy shall not affect the power of the 
 remaining members to execute the duties of the Board.
 (2) Vacancy appointments.--Any member appointed to fill a 
 vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the term for which the 
 predecessor of the member was appointed.
 (3) Reappointment.--The President may reappoint an 
 appointed member of the Board for a second term in the same 
 manner as the original appointment. A member who has served for 
 two consecutive 6-year terms shall not be eligible for 
 reappointment until two years after the member has ceased to 
 serve.
 (4) Removal for cause.--Upon confirmation, members of the 
 Board may not be removed except by the President for cause.
 (d) Chair.--The President shall designate one of the members of the 
Board, other than the Secretary, to serve at the will of the President 
as Chair of the Board.
 (e) Compensation.--Members of the Board (other than the Secretary) 
shall be entitled to compensation at a level equivalent to level II of 
the Executive Schedule, in accordance with section 5313 of title 5, 
United States Code.
 (f) General Duties of the Board.--
 (1) In general.--The Board shall develop policies, 
 procedures, guidelines, and requirements to carry out this Act, 
 including those related to--
 (A) eligibility;
 (B) enrollment;
 (C) benefits;
 (D) provider participation standards and 
 qualifications, as defined in title III;
 (E) national and State funding levels;
 (F) methods for determining amounts of payments to 
 providers of covered services, consistent with subtitle 
 B of title VI;
 (G) the determination of medical necessity and 
 appropriateness with respect to coverage of certain 
 services;
 (H) assisting State health security programs with 
 planning for capital expenditures and service delivery;
 (I) planning for health professional education 
 funding (as specified in title VI);
 (J) allocating funds provided under title VII; and
 (K) encouraging States to develop regional planning 
 mechanisms (described in section 405(a)(3)).
 (2) Regulations.--Regulations authorized by this Act shall 
 be issued by the Board in accordance with the provisions of 
 section 553 of title 5, United States Code.
 (g) Uniform Reporting Standards; Annual Report; Studies.--
 (1) Uniform reporting standards.--
 (A) In general.--The Board shall establish uniform 
 reporting requirements and standards to ensure an 
 adequate national data base regarding health services 
 practitioners, services and finances of State health 
 security programs, approved plans, providers, and the 
 costs of facilities and practitioners providing 
 services. Such standards shall include, to the maximum 
 extent feasible, health outcome measures.
 (B) Reports.--The Board shall analyze regularly 
 information reported to it, and to State health 
 security programs pursuant to such requirements and 
 standards.
 (2) Annual report.--Beginning January 1, of the second year 
 beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
 Board shall annually report to Congress on the following:
 (A) The status of implementation of the Act.
 (B) Enrollment under this Act.
 (C) Benefits under this Act.
 (D) Expenditures and financing under this Act.
 (E) Cost-containment measures and achievements 
 under this Act.
 (F) Quality assurance.
 (G) Health care utilization patterns, including any 
 changes attributable to the program.
 (H) Long-range plans and goals for the delivery of 
 health services.
 (I) Differences in the health status of the 
 populations of the different States, including income 
 and racial characteristics.
 (J) Necessary changes in the education of health 
 personnel.
 (K) Plans for improving service to medically 
 underserved populations.
 (L) Transition problems as a result of 
 implementation of this Act.
 (M) Opportunities for improvements under this Act.
 (3) Statistical analyses and other studies.--The Board may, 
 either directly or by contract--
 (A) make statistical and other studies, on a 
 nationwide, regional, state, or local basis, of any 
 aspect of the operation of this Act, including studies 
 of the effect of the Act upon the health of the people 
 of the United States and the effect of comprehensive 
 health services upon the health of persons receiving 
 such services;
 (B) develop and test methods of providing through 
 payment for services or otherwise, additional 
 incentives for adherence by providers to standards of 
 adequacy, access, and quality; methods of consumer and 
 peer review and peer control of the utilization of 
 drugs, of laboratory services, and of other services; 
 and methods of consumer and peer review of the quality 
 of services;
 (C) develop and test, for use by the Board, records 
 and information retrieval systems and budget systems 
 for health services administration, and develop and 
 test model systems for use by providers of services;
 (D) develop and test, for use by providers of 
 services, records and information retrieval systems 
 useful in the furnishing of preventive or diagnostic 
 services;
 (E) develop, in collaboration with the 
 pharmaceutical profession, and test, improved 
 administrative practices or improved methods for the 
 reimbursement of independent pharmacies for the cost of 
 furnishing drugs as a covered service; and
 (F) make such other studies as it may consider 
 necessary or promising for the evaluation, or for the 
 improvement, of the operation of this Act.
 (4) Report on use of existing federal health care 
 facilities.--Not later than one year after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Board shall recommend to the 
 Congress one or more proposals for the treatment of health care 
 facilities of the Federal Government.
 (h) Executive Director.--
 (1) Appointment.--There is hereby established the position 
 of Executive Director of the Board. The Director shall be 
 appointed by the Board and shall serve as secretary to the 
 Board and perform such duties in the administration of this 
 title as the Board may assign.
 (2) Delegation.--The Board is authorized to delegate to the 
 Director or to any other officer or employee of the Board or, 
 with the approval of the Secretary of Health and Human Services 
 (and subject to reimbursement of identifiable costs), to any 
 other officer or employee of the Department of Health and Human 
 Services, any of its functions or duties under this Act other 
 than--
 (A) the issuance of regulations; or
 (B) the determination of the availability of funds 
 and their allocation to implement this Act.
 (3) Compensation.--The Executive Director of the Board 
 shall be entitled to compensation at a level equivalent to 
 level III of the Executive Schedule, in accordance with section 
 5314 of title 5, United States Code.
 (i) Inspector General.--The Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 U.S.C. 
App.) is amended--
 (1) in section 11(1) by inserting after ``Corporation;'' 
 the following: ``the Chair of the American Health Security 
 Standards Board;'';
 (2) in section 11(2) by inserting after ``Information 
 Agency,'' the following: ``the American Health Security 
 Standards Board,''; and
 (3) by inserting after section 8F the following:
``Sec. 8G. Special provisions concerning American Health Security 
 Standards Board
 ``The Inspector General of the American Health Security Standards 
Board, in addition to the other authorities vested by this Act, shall 
have the same authority, with respect to the Board and the American 
Health Security Program under this Act, as the Inspector General for 
the Department of Health and Human Services has with respect to the 
Secretary of Health and Human Services and the medicare and medicaid 
programs, respectively.''.
 (j) Staff.--The Board shall employ such staff as the Board may deem 
necessary.
 (k) Access to Information.--The Secretary of Health and Human 
Services shall make available to the Board all information available 
from sources within the Department or from other sources, pertaining to 
the duties of the Board.

SEC. 402. AMERICAN HEALTH SECURITY ADVISORY COUNCIL.

 (a) In General.--The Board shall provide for an American Health 
Security Advisory Council (in this section referred to as the 
``Council'') to advise the Board on its activities.
 (b) Membership.--The Council shall be composed of--
 (1) the Chair of the Board, who shall serve as Chair of the 
 Council, and
 (2) twenty members, not otherwise in the employ of the 
 United States, appointed by the Board without regard to the 
 provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing 
 appointments in the competitive service.
The appointed members shall include, in accordance with subsection (e), 
individuals who are representative of State health security programs, 
public health professionals, providers of health services, and of 
individuals (who shall constitute a majority of the Council) who are 
representative of consumers of such services, including a balanced 
representation of employers, unions, consumer organizations, and 
population groups with special health care needs.
 (c) Terms of Members.--Each appointed member shall hold office for 
a term of four years, except that--
 (1) any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring during 
 the term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall 
 be appointed for the remainder of that term; and
 (2) the terms of the members first taking office shall 
 expire, as designated by the Board at the time of appointment, 
 five at the end of the first year, five at the end of the 
 second year, five at the end of the third year, and five at the 
 end of the fourth year after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (d) Vacancies.--
 (1) In general.--The Board shall fill any vacancy in the 
 membership of the Council in the same manner as the original 
 appointment. The vacancy shall not affect the power of the 
 remaining members to execute the duties of the Council.
 (2) Vacancy appointments.--Any member appointed to fill a 
 vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the term for which the 
 predecessor of the member was appointed.
 (3) Reappointment.--The Board may reappoint an appointed 
 member of the Council for a second term in the same manner as 
 the original appointment.
 (e) Qualifications.--
 (1) Public health representatives.--Members of the Council 
 who are representative of State health security programs and 
 public health professionals shall be individuals who have 
 extensive experience in the financing and delivery of care 
 under public health programs.
 (2) Providers.--Members of the Council who are 
 representative of providers of health care shall be individuals 
 who are outstanding in fields related to medical, hospital, or 
 other health activities, or who are representative of 
 organizations or associations of professional health 
 practitioners.
 (3) Consumers.--Members who are representative of consumers 
 of such care shall be individuals, not engaged in and having no 
 financial interest in the furnishing of health services, who 
 are familiar with the needs of various segments of the 
 population for personal health services and are experienced in 
 dealing with problems associated with the consumption of such 
 services.
 (f) Duties.--
 (1) In general.--It shall be the duty of the Council--
 (A) to advise the Board on matters of general 
 policy in the administration of this Act, in the 
 formulation of regulations, and in the performance of 
 the Board's duties under section 401; and
 (B) to study the operation of this Act and the 
 utilization of health services under it, with a view to 
 recommending any changes in the administration of the 
 Act or in its provisions which may appear desirable.
 (2) Report.--The Council shall make an annual report to the 
 Board on the performance of its functions, including any 
 recommendations it may have with respect thereto, and the Board 
 shall promptly transmit the report to the Congress, together 
 with a report by the Board on any recommendations of the 
 Council that have not been followed.
 (g) Staff.--The Council, its members, and any committees of the 
Council shall be provided with such secretarial, clerical, or other 
assistance as may be authorized by the Board for carrying out their 
respective functions.
 (h) Meetings.--The Council shall meet as frequently as the Board 
deems necessary, but not less than four times each year. Upon request 
by seven or more members it shall be the duty of the Chair to call a 
meeting of the Council.
 (i) Compensation.--Members of the Council shall be reimbursed by 
the Board for travel and per diem in lieu of subsistence expenses 
during the performance of duties of the Board in accordance with 
subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.
 (j) FACA Not Applicable.--The provisions of the Federal Advisory 
Committee Act shall not apply to the Council.

SEC. 403. PROFESSIONAL, TECHNICAL, AND TEMPORARY ADVISORY COMMITTEES.

 (a) In General.--The Board shall appoint the standing advisory 
committees specified in subsections (b) through (f), and such other 
standing professional and technical committees in order to advise it in 
carrying out its duties under this Act.
 (b) Advisory Committee on Benefits.--
 (1) In general.--The Board shall appoint a standing 
 Advisory Committee on Benefits to advise it with respect to the 
 several classes of covered services under this Act.
 (2) Membership.--The membership of the committee shall 
 include individuals (in such number as the Board may determine) 
 drawn from the health professions, from consumers of health 
 services, from providers of health services (including non-
 medical licensed and non-licensed providers), or from other 
 sources, whom the Board deems best qualified to advise it with 
 respect to the professional and technical aspects of the 
 furnishing and utilization of, and the evaluation of, a class 
 of covered services designated by the Board, and with respect 
 to the relationship of that class of services to other covered 
 services. In appointing such individuals, the Board shall 
 assure significant representation of consumers of health 
 services and providers of health services.
 (c) Advisory Committee on Cost Containment.--
 (1) In general.--The Board shall appoint a standing 
 Advisory Committee on Cost Containment to advise it with 
 respect to the payments and cost containment measures contained 
 in title VI of this Act.
 (2) Membership.--The membership of the committee shall 
 include individuals (in such number as the Board may determine) 
 with national recognition for their expertise in health 
 economics, health care financing, provider reimbursement, and 
 related fields. In appointing individuals the Board shall 
 assure significant representation of consumers of health 
 services and providers of health services.
 (d) Advisory Committee on Primary Care and the Medically 
Underserved.--
 (1) In general.--The Board shall appoint a standing 
 Advisory Committee on Primary Care and the Medically 
 Underserved to advise it with respect to title VII of this Act, 
 including with respect to the delivery of services and the 
 education and training of health professionals, and to consider 
 means of increasing the supply and expanding the scope of 
 practice of mid-level professionals and the use of community 
 health outreach workers and other non-professional health care 
 workers.
 (2) Membership.--The membership of the committee shall 
 include individuals (in such number as the Board may determine) 
 from the health professions and health services with expertise 
 in--
 (A) primary care services;
 (B) the education and training of primary care 
 practitioners;
 (C) the special health needs of medically 
 underserved populations;
 (D) the training, educational, and financial 
 incentives that would encourage health practitioners to 
 serve in medically underserved areas;
 (E) the delivery of health services through 
 community-based and public facilities; and
 (F) developing alternative models of delivering 
 primary health services to medically underserved 
 populations.
 In appointing such individuals, the Board shall assure 
 significant representation of consumers of health services and 
 providers of health services.
 (e) Advisory Committee on Mental Health and Substance Abuse 
Treatment Services.--
 (1) In general.--The Board shall appoint a standing 
 Advisory Committee on Mental Health and Substance Abuse 
 Treatment Services to advise it with respect to the manner in 
 which the benefits under this Act for mental health services 
 and substance abuse treatment services should be modified to 
 best meet the objectives of this Act.
 (2) Membership.--The membership of the committee shall 
 include individuals (in such number as the Board may determine) 
 with expertise in health care economics, who are representative 
 of the multi-disciplinary range of providers of such services, 
 who are consumers of such services, and who represent advocacy 
 groups representing consumers of such services.
 (3) Responsibilities.--The committee shall--
 (A) study changes in the utilization patterns and 
 costs which accompany the provision of mental health 
 services and substance abuse treatment services;
 (B) study and make recommendations on any changes 
 that may be advisable in the utilization review 
 thresholds specified in section 204(b)(2)(A);
 (C) make recommendations on ways to create a 
 continuum of care and encourage the provision of care 
 in the least restrictive appropriate setting;
 (D) develop a standard set of practices for care 
 coordination services, including--
 (i) the range of care coordination services 
 that should be offered for a specific target 
 population,
 (ii) the organizational structure in which 
 care coordination services should be based,
 (iii) the minimum training requirements for 
 care coordinators, and
 (iv) the standards for the clinical 
 necessity of care coordination services,
 and study (and make recommendations concerning) peer 
 care coordination services; and
 (E) report any initial recommendations to the Board 
 by January 1, 1996.
 (4) Role of substance abuse and mental health services 
 administration.--The Board shall consult with the Administrator 
 of the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
 Administration in the appointment of members to, and operation 
 of, the committee.
 (f) Advisory Committee on Prescription Drugs.--
 (1) In general.--The Board shall appoint a standing 
 Advisory Committee on Prescription Drugs to advise it with 
 respect to the list of approved prescription drugs and 
 biologicals under section 616(a)(1) and other matters relating 
 to the coverage of prescription drugs under this Act.
 (2) Membership.--
 (A) In general.--The membership of the committee 
 shall include individuals (in such number as the Board 
 may determine) with expertise in appropriate 
 utilization of prescription and nonprescription drug 
 and biological therapies and of the relative safety and 
 efficacy of prescription drugs and biologicals.
 (B) Areas of expertise.--A majority of the members 
 of the committee shall be physicians. Members of the 
 committee shall include at least a dentist, a nurse, 
 and a pharmacist, and individuals with special 
 knowledge or expertise in at least the following areas: 
 geriatric, obstetric, pediatric, psychiatric, and 
 neurological problems associated with drug therapies; 
 clinical pharmacology; pharmacoepidemiology; and 
 comparative clinical trials of drugs (including 
 statisticians and biopharmaceutic specialists).
 (C) Conflict of interest prohibition.--No 
 individual who is an employee of a manufacturer of a 
 drug or biological or who otherwise has a material 
 financial interest directly or indirectly with respect 
 to such a manufacturer, or who has an immediate family 
 member (as defined by the Board) who is such an 
 employee or has such an interest, shall serve as a 
 member of the committee.
 (3) Responsibilities.--The committee shall--
 (A) continuously review scientific and medical 
 information pertaining to the relative safety and 
 efficacy, and the comparability, of prescription drugs 
 and biologicals approved for marketing in the United 
 States; and
 (B) recommend drug use classifications and 
 identify, within such a classification, drugs that are 
 therapeutic alternates for a given indication and 
 indications for which particular drugs are superior 
 based on safety and efficacy.
 The committee is not authorized to engage in drug price 
 negotiations nor define acceptable costs for any product.
 (4) Consumer input.--In conducting its activities, the 
 committee shall solicit advice and comments from a panel of 
 consumer advocates.
 (g) Temporary Committees.--The Board is authorized to appoint such 
temporary professional and technical committees as it deems necessary 
to advise it on special problems not encompassed in the assignments of 
standing committees appointed under this section or to supplement the 
advice of standing committees.
 (h) Reporting.--Committees appointed under this section shall 
report from time to time (but not less often than biannually) to the 
Board, and copies of their reports shall be transmitted by the Board to 
the American Health Security Advisory Council and be made readily 
available to the public.
 (i) Compensation.--All members of the committees established under 
this section shall be reimbursed by the Board for travel and per diem 
in lieu of subsistence expenses during the performance of duties of the 
Board in accordance with subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United 
States Code.
 (j) Advice from Prospective Payment Assessment Commission, 
Practitioner Payment Review Commission, Etc.--For provisions relating 
to role of certain commissions in reviewing payment rates, see section 
620.

SEC. 404. AMERICAN HEALTH SECURITY QUALITY COUNCIL.

 (a) Establishment.--There is hereby established an American Health 
Security Quality Council.
 (b) Appointment and Terms of Members.--
 (1) In general.--The Council shall be composed of 10 
 members appointed by the President. The President shall first 
 appoint individuals on a timely basis so as to provide for the 
 operation of the Council by not later than January 1, 1995.
 (2) Selection of members.--Each member of the Council shall 
 be a member of a health profession. Six members of the Council 
 shall be physicians. Individuals shall be appointed to the 
 Council on the basis of national reputations for clinical and 
 academic excellence.
 (3) Terms of members.--Individuals appointed to the Council 
 shall serve for a term of 5 years, except that the terms of 4 
 of the individuals initially appointed shall be, as designated 
 by the President at the time of their appointment, for 1, 2, 3, 
 and 4 years.
 (c) Vacancies.--
 (1) In general.--The President shall fill any vacancy in 
 the membership of the Council in the same manner as the 
 original appointment. The vacancy shall not affect the power of 
 the remaining members to execute the duties of the Council.
 (2) Vacancy appointments.--Any member appointed to fill a 
 vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the term for which the 
 predecessor of the member was appointed.
 (3) Reappointment.--The President may reappoint a member of 
 the Council for a second term in the same manner as the 
 original appointment. A member who has served for two 
 consecutive 5-year terms shall not be eligible for 
 reappointment until two years after the member has ceased to 
 serve.
 (d) Chair.--The President shall designate one of the members of the 
Council to serve at the will of the President as Chair of the Council.
 (e) Compensation.--Members of the Council who are not employees of 
the Federal Government shall be entitled to compensation at a level 
equivalent to level II of the Executive Schedule, in accordance with 
section 5313 of title 5, United States Code.
 (f) General Duties of the Council.--The Council is responsible for 
quality review activities under title V. The Council shall report to 
the Board annually on the conduct of activities under such title and 
shall report to the Board annually specifically on findings from 
outcomes research and development of practice guidelines that may 
affect the Board's determination of coverage of services under section 
401(f)(1)(G).

SEC. 405. STATE HEALTH SECURITY PROGRAMS.

 (a) Submission of Plans.--
 (1) In general.--Each State shall submit to the Board a 
 plan for a State health security program for providing for 
 health care services to the residents of the State in 
 accordance with this Act.
 (2) Regional programs.--A State may join with one or more 
 neighboring States to submit to the Board a plan for a regional 
 health security program instead of separate State health 
 security programs.
 (3) Regional planning mechanisms.--The Board shall provide 
 incentives for States to develop regional planning mechanisms 
 to promote the rational distribution of, adequate access to, 
 and efficient use of, tertiary care facilities, equipment, and 
 services.
 (b) Review and Approval of Plans.--
 (1) In general.--The Board shall review plans submitted 
 under subsection (a) and determine whether such plans meet the 
 requirements for approval. The Board shall not approve such a 
 plan unless it finds that the plan (or State law) provides, 
 consistent with the provisions of this Act, for the following:
 (A) Payment for required health services for 
 eligible individuals in the State in accordance with 
 this Act.
 (B) Adequate administration, including the 
 designation of a single State agency responsible for 
 the administration (or supervision of the 
 administration) of the program.
 (C) The establishment of a State health security 
 budget.
 (D) Establishment of payment methodologies 
 (consistent with subtitle B of title VII).
 (E) Assurances that individuals have the freedom to 
 choose practitioners and other health care providers 
 for services covered under this Act.
 (F) A procedure for carrying out long-term regional 
 management and planning functions with respect to the 
 delivery and distribution of health care services 
 that--
 (i) ensures participation of consumers of 
 health services and providers of health 
 services, and
 (ii) gives priority to the most acute 
 shortages and maldistributions of health 
 personnel and facilities and the most serious 
 deficiencies in the delivery of covered 
 services and to the means for the speedy 
 alleviation of these shortcomings.
 (G) The licensure and regulation of all health 
 providers and facilities to ensure compliance with 
 Federal and State laws and to promote quality of care.
 (H) Establishment of a quality review system in 
 accordance with section 502.
 (I) Establishment of an independent ombudsman for 
 consumers to register complaints about the organization 
 and administration of the State health security program 
 and to help resolve complaints and disputes between 
 consumers and providers.
 (J) Publication of an annual report on the 
 operation of the State health security program, which 
 report shall include information on cost, progress 
 towards achieving full enrollment, public access to 
 health services, quality review, health outcomes, 
 health professional training, and the needs of 
 medically underserved populations.
 (K) Provision of a fraud and abuse prevention and 
 control unit that the Inspector General determines 
 meets the requirements of section 413(a).
 (L) Provision that--
 (i) all claims or requests for payment for 
 services shall be accompanied by the unique 
 provider identifier assigned under section 
 414(a) to the provider and the unique patient 
 identifier assigned to the individual under 
 section 414(b);
 (ii) no payment shall be made under the 
 program for the provision of health care 
 services by any provider unless the provider 
 has furnished the program with the unique 
 provider identifier assigned under section 
 414(a);
 (iii) the plan shall use the unique patient 
 identifier assigned under section 414(b) to an 
 individual as the identifier of the individual 
 in the processing of claims and other purposes 
 (as specified by the Board); and
 (iv) queries made under section 412(c)(2) 
 shall be made using the unique provider 
 identifier specified under section 414(a).
 (M) Prohibit payment in cases of prohibited 
 physician referrals under section 304.
 (N) Effective January 1, 2001, provide for use of a 
 uniform electronic data base in accordance with section 
 504(a).
 (2) Consequences of failure to comply.--If the Board finds 
 that a State plan submitted under paragraph (1) does not meet 
 the requirements for approval under this section or that a 
 State health security program or specific portion of such 
 program, the plan for which was previously approved, no longer 
 meets such requirements, the Board shall provide notice to the 
 State of such failure and that unless corrective action is 
 taken within a period specified by the Board, the Board shall 
 place the State health security program (or specific portions 
 of such program) in receivership under the jurisdiction of the 
 Board.
 (c) State Health Security Advisory Councils.--
 (1) In general.--For each State, the Governor shall provide 
 for appointment of a State Health Security Advisory Council to 
 advise and make recommendations to the Governor and State with 
 respect to the implementation of the State health security 
 program in the State.
 (2) Membership.--Each State Health Security Advisory 
 Council shall be composed of at least 11 individuals. The 
 appointed members shall include individuals who are 
 representative of the State health security program, public 
 health professionals, providers of health services, and of 
 individuals (who shall constitute a majority) who are 
 representative of consumers of such services, including a 
 balanced representation of employers, unions and consumer 
 organizations.
 (3) Duties.--
 (A) In general.--Each State Health Security 
 Advisory Council shall review, and submit comments to 
 the Governor concerning the implementation of the State 
 health security program in the State.
 (B) Assistance.--Each State Health Security 
 Advisory Council shall provide assistance and technical 
 support to community organizations and public and 
 private non-profit agencies submitting applications for 
 funding under appropriate State and Federal public 
 health programs, with particular emphasis placed on 
 assisting those applicants with broad consumer 
 representation.
 (d) State Use of Fiscal Agents.--
 (1) In general.--Each State health security program, using 
 competitive bidding procedures, may enter into such contracts 
 with qualified entities, such as voluntary associations, as the 
 State determines to be appropriate to process claims and to 
 perform other related functions of fiscal agents under the 
 State health security program.
 (2) Restriction.--Except as the Board may provide for good 
 cause shown, in no case may more than one contract described in 
 paragraph (1) be entered into under a State health security 
 program.

SEC. 406. COMPLEMENTARY CONDUCT OF RELATED HEALTH PROGRAMS.

 In performing functions with respect to health personnel education 
and training, health research, environmental health, disability 
insurance, vocational rehabilitation, the regulation of food and drugs, 
and all other matters pertaining to health, the Secretary of Health and 
Human Services shall direct all activities of the Department of Health 
and Human Services toward contributions to the health of the people 
complementary to this Act.

 Subtitle B--Control Over Fraud and Abuse

SEC. 411. APPLICATION OF FEDERAL SANCTIONS TO ALL FRAUD AND ABUSE UNDER 
 AMERICAN HEALTH SECURITY PROGRAM.

 The following sections of the Social Security Act shall apply to 
State health security programs in the same manner as they apply to 
State medical assistance plans under title XIX of such Act (except that 
in applying such provisions any reference to the Secretary is deemed a 
reference to the Board):
 (1) Section 1128 (relating to exclusion of individuals and 
 entities).
 (2) Section 1128A (civil monetary penalties).
 (3) Section 1128B (criminal penalties).
 (4) Section 1124 (relating to disclosure of ownership and 
 related information).
 (5) Section 1126 (relating to disclosure of certain 
 owners).

SEC. 412. NATIONAL HEALTH CARE FRAUD DATA BASE.

 (a) Establishment.--The American Health Security Standards Board, 
through the Inspector General, shall establish a national data base (in 
this section referred to as the ``data base'') containing information 
relating to health care fraud and abuse.
 (b) Data Included.--
 (1) In general.--The data base shall include such 
 information as the Inspector General, in consultation with the 
 Board, shall specify, and shall include at least the 
 information described in paragraph (2).
 (2) Specified information.--The information specified in 
 this paragraph is, with respect to providers of health care 
 services, the identity of any provider--
 (A) that has been convicted of a crime for which 
 the provider may be excluded from participation under a 
 health program (as defined in paragraph (3));
 (B) whose license to provide health care has been 
 revoked or suspended (as described in section 
 1128(b)(5) of the Social Security Act);
 (C) that has been excluded or suspended from a 
 health program under section 1128 of the Social 
 Security Act or from any other Federal or State health 
 care program;
 (D) with respect to whom a civil money penalty has 
 been imposed under this Act or the Social Security Act; 
 or
 (E) that otherwise is subject to exclusion from 
 participation under a health program.
 (3) Health program defined.--In this section, the term 
 ``health program'' means a State health security program and 
 includes the medicare program (under title XVIII of the Social 
 Security Act) and a State health care program (as defined in 
 section 1128(h) of such Act).
 (c) Reporting Requirement.--
 (1) Reporting.--Each State health security program shall 
 provide such information to the Inspector General as the 
 Inspector General may require in order to carry out fraud and 
 abuse control activities and for purposes of maintaining the 
 data base.
 (2) Querying.--In accordance with rules established by the 
 Board (in consultation with the Inspector General), each State 
 health security program shall query periodically (as specified 
 by the Inspector General)--
 (A) the data base to determine if providers of 
 health services for which the program makes payment are 
 not disqualified from providing such services, and
 (B) the Secretary of Health and Human Services, 
 concerning information obtained by the Secretary under 
 part B of the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 
 1986 relating to practitioners.
 (3) Coordination with malpractice data base.--The Secretary 
 of Health and Human Services shall provide for the coordination 
 of the reporting and disclosure of information under this 
 section with information under part B of the Health Care 
 Quality Improvement Act of 1986.
 (4) Uniform manner.--Information shall be reported under 
 this subsection in a uniform manner (in accordance with 
 standards of the Inspector General) that permits aggregation of 
 reported information.
 (5) Access for audit.--Each State health security program 
 shall provide the Inspector General such access to information 
 as may be required to verify the information reported under 
 this subsection.
 (6) Penalty for false information.--Any person that submits 
 false information required to be provided under this subsection 
 or that denies access to information under paragraph (5) may be 
 imprisoned for not more than 5 years, or fined, or both, in 
 accordance with title 18, United States Code.
 (7) Confidentiality.--The Board shall establish rules that 
 protect the confidentiality of the information in the data 
 base.

SEC. 413. REQUIREMENTS FOR OPERATION OF STATE HEALTH CARE FRAUD AND 
 ABUSE CONTROL UNITS.

 (a) Requirement.--In order to meet the requirement of section 
405(b)(1)(K), each State health security program must establish and 
maintain a health care fraud and abuse control unit (in this section 
referred to as a ``fraud unit'') that meets requirements of this 
section and other requirements of the Board. Such a unit may be a State 
medicaid fraud control unit (described in section 1903(q) of the Social 
Security Act).
 (b) Structure of Unit.--The fraud unit must--
 (1) be a single identifiable entity of the State 
 government;
 (2) be separate and distinct from the State agency with 
 principal responsibility for the administration of the State 
 health security program; and
 (3) meet 1 of the following requirements:.
 (A) It must be a unit of the office of the State 
 Attorney General or of another department of State 
 government which possesses statewide authority to 
 prosecute individuals for criminal violations.
 (B) If it is in a State the constitution of which 
 does not provide for the criminal prosecution of 
 individuals by a statewide authority and has formal 
 procedures, approved by the Board, that (i) assure its 
 referral of suspected criminal violations relating to 
 the State health insurance plan to the appropriate 
 authority or authorities in the States for prosecution, 
 and (ii) assure its assistance of, and coordination 
 with, such authority or authorities in such 
 prosecutions.
 (C) It must have a formal working relationship with 
 the office of the State Attorney General and have 
 formal procedures (including procedures for its 
 referral of suspected criminal violations to such 
 office) which are approved by the Board and which 
 provide effective coordination of activities between 
 the fraud unit and such office with respect to the 
 detection, investigation, and prosecution of suspected 
 criminal violations relating to the State health 
 insurance plan.
 (c) Functions.--The fraud unit must--
 (1) have the function of conducting a statewide program for 
 the investigation and prosecution of violations of all 
 applicable State laws regarding any and all aspects of fraud in 
 connection with any aspect of the provision of health care 
 services and activities of providers of such services under the 
 State health security program;
 (2) have procedures for reviewing complaints of the abuse 
 and neglect of patients of providers and facilities that 
 receive payments under the State health security program, and, 
 where appropriate, for acting upon such complaints under the 
 criminal laws of the State or for referring them to other State 
 agencies for action; and
 (3) provide for the collection, or referral for collection 
 to a single State agency, of overpayments that are made under 
 the State health security program to providers and that are 
 discovered by the fraud unit in carrying out its activities.
 (d) Resources.--The fraud unit must--
 (1) employ such auditors, attorneys, investigators, and 
 other necessary personnel,
 (2) be organized in such a manner, and
 (3) provide sufficient resources (as specified by the 
 Board),
as is necessary to promote the effective and efficient conduct of the 
unit's activities.
 (e) Cooperative Agreements.--The fraud unit must have cooperative 
agreements (as specified by the Board) with--
 (1) similar fraud units in other States,
 (2) the Inspector General, and
 (3) the Attorney General of the United States.
 (f) Reports.--The fraud unit must submit to the Inspector General 
an application and annual reports containing such information as the 
Inspector General determines to be necessary to determine whether the 
unit meets the previous requirements of this section.

SEC. 414. ASSIGNMENT OF UNIQUE PROVIDER AND PATIENT IDENTIFIERS.

 (a) Provider Identifiers.--
 (1) In general.--The Board shall provide for the 
 assignment, to each individual or entity providing health care 
 services under a State health security program, of a unique 
 provider identifier.
 (2) Response to queries.--Upon the request of a State 
 health security program with respect to a provider, the Board 
 shall provide the program with the unique provider identifier 
 (if any) assigned to the provider under paragraph (1).
 (b) Patient Identifiers.--The Board shall provide for the 
assignment, to each eligible individual, of a unique patient 
identifier. The identifier so assigned may be the Social Security 
account number of the individual.
 (c) Requirement to Use Identifiers.--Each State health security 
program is required under section 405(b)(1)(L) to use the unique 
identifiers assigned under this section.

 TITLE V--QUALITY ASSESSMENT

SEC. 501. FUNCTIONS OF QUALITY COUNCIL; DEVELOPMENT OF PRACTICE 
 GUIDELINES AND APPLICATION TO OUTLIERS.

 (a) Development of Practice Guidelines.--The American Health 
Security Quality Council (in this title referred to as the 
``Council'')--
 (1) shall collect data from outcomes research, including 
 data on patient satisfaction and post-hospital discharge 
 experience, on an ongoing basis (whether conducted by the 
 Federal Government or other entities), and
 (2) on the basis of such data and existing clinical 
 knowledge, shall develop practice guidelines.
Such guidelines may vary based upon the area in which the services are 
provided and the degree of training, specialization, or similar 
characteristics of providers. Such guidelines must be updated on an 
annual basis and based on monitoring of outcomes research and other 
clinical data. Such guidelines shall be based on the degree to which a 
process of care increases the probability of desired patient outcomes.
 (b) Profiling of Patterns of Practice; Identification of 
Outliers.--The Council shall adopt methodologies for profiling the 
patterns of practice of health care professionals and for identifying 
outliers (as defined in subsection (f)).
 (c) Centers of Excellence.--The Council shall develop guidelines 
for certain medical procedures designated by the Board to be performed 
only at tertiary care centers which can meet standards for frequency of 
procedure performance and intensity of support mechanisms that are 
consistent with the high probability of desired patient outcome. 
Reimbursement under this Act for such a designated procedure may only 
be provided if the procedure was performed at a center that meets such 
standards.
 (d) Remedial Actions.--The Council shall develop standards for 
education and sanctions with respect to outliers so as to assure the 
quality of health care services provided under this Act.
 (e) Dissemination.--The Council shall disseminate to the State--
 (1) the guidelines developed under subsections (a) and (c),
 (2) the methodologies adopted under subsection (b), and
 (3) the standards developed under subsection (d),
for use by the States under section 502.
 (f) Outlier Defined.--In this title, the term ``outlier'' means a 
health care provider whose pattern of practice, relative to applicable 
practice guidelines, suggests deficiencies in the quality of health 
care services being provided.

SEC. 502. STATE QUALITY REVIEW PROGRAMS.

 (a) Requirement.--In order to meet the requirement of section 
405(b)(1)(H), each State health security program shall establish one or 
more qualified entities to conduct quality reviews of persons providing 
covered services under the program, in accordance with standards 
established under subsection (b)(1) (except as provided in subsection 
(b)(2)) and subsection (d).
 (b) Federal Standards.--
 (1) In general.--The Council shall establish standards with 
 respect to--
 (A) the adoption of practice guidelines (developed 
 under section 501(a)),
 (B) the identification of outliers (consistent with 
 methodologies adopted under section 501(b)),
 (C) the development of remedial programs and 
 monitoring for outliers, and
 (D) the application of sanctions (consistent with 
 the standards developed under section 501(c)).
 (2) State discretion.--A State may apply under subsection 
 (a) standards other than those established under paragraph (1) 
 so long as the State demonstrates to the satisfaction of the 
 Council on an annual basis that the standards applied have been 
 as efficacious in promoting and achieving improved quality of 
 care as the application of the standards established under 
 paragraph (1). Positive improvements in quality shall be 
 documented by reductions in the variations of clinical care 
 process and improvement in patient outcomes.
 (c) Qualifications.--
 (1) In general.--An entity is not qualified to conduct 
 quality reviews under subsection (a) unless the entity--
 (A) is administratively independent of the 
 individual or board that administers the State health 
 security program, and
 (B) does not provide any financial incentive to 
 reviewers to favor one pattern of practice over 
 another.
 (2) Provider-specific entities.--Subject to paragraph (1), 
 a State may provide that an individual hospital (or other 
 institutional provider) may serve as a qualified entity to 
 conduct quality reviews under subsection (a).

SEC. 503. ELIMINATION OF UTILIZATION REVIEW PROGRAMS; TRANSITION.

 (a) Intent.--It is the intention of this title to replace by 
January 1, 1998, random utilization controls with a systematic review 
of patterns of practice that compromise the quality of care.
 (b) Superseding Case Reviews.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to the succeeding provisions of 
 this subsection, the program of quality review provided under 
 the previous sections of this title supersede all existing 
 Federal requirements for utilization review programs, including 
 requirements for random case-by-case reviews and programs 
 requiring pre-certification of medical procedures on a case-by-
 case basis.
 (2) Transition.--Before January 1, 1998, the Board and the 
 States may employ existing utilization review standards and 
 mechanisms as may be necessary to effect the transition to 
 pattern of practice-based reviews.
 (3) Construction.--Nothing in this subsection shall be 
 construed--
 (A) as precluding the case-by-case review of the 
 provision of care--
 (i) in individual incidents where the 
 quality of care has significantly deviated from 
 acceptable standards of practice, and
 (ii) with respect to a provider who has 
 been determined to be an outlier; or
 (B) as precluding the case management of 
 catastrophic, mental health, or substance abuse cases 
 where such management is necessary to achieve 
 appropriate, cost-effective, and beneficial 
 comprehensive medical care, as provided for in section 
 204.

SEC. 504. DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL ELECTRONIC DATA BASE.

 (a) Use by States.--In order to meet the requirement of this 
section, for purposes of section 405(b)(1)(N)), each State health 
security program shall develop and use a uniform electronic data base 
which uses the software designated under subsection (b) and which 
assures confidentiality under subsection (c), for all patient records 
in order to enable systematic quality review and outcomes analysis. 
Subject to subsection (c), data in such data base shall be made 
available, under rules established by the Board, in order to facilitate 
the portability of patient records and comparative outcomes research 
analysis.
 (b) Uniform Software.--The Board shall designate the uniform 
software that shall be used by States in the operation of their 
electronic data bases, in order to facilitate the portability of 
patient records and comparative outcomes research analysis. The Board 
shall not grant any waiver of the requirement of the previous sentence.
 (c) Confidentiality.--The Board shall establish standards that are 
designed to protect the privacy and otherwise shield the identity of 
the patients whose records are included in the data base. Under such 
standards, government agencies shall not have access to information in 
the data base that will identify individual patients except in cases of 
quality review procedures which require that individual patients be 
informed of necessary changes in their treatment.

 TITLE VI--HEALTH SECURITY BUDGET; PAYMENTS; COST CONTAINMENT MEASURES

 Subtitle A--Budgeting and Payments to States

SEC. 601. NATIONAL HEALTH SECURITY BUDGET.

 (a) National Health Security Budget.--
 (1) In general.--By not later than September 1 before the 
 beginning of each year (beginning with 1995), the Board shall 
 establish a national health security budget, which--
 (A) specifies the total expenditures (including 
 expenditures for administrative costs) to be made by 
 the Federal Government and the States for covered 
 health care services under this Act, and
 (B) allocates those expenditures among the States 
 consistent with section 604.
 Pursuant to subsection (b), such budget for a year shall not 
 exceed the budget for the preceding year increased by the 
 percentage increase in gross domestic product.
 (2) Division of budget into components.--The national 
 health security budget shall consist of at least 4 components:
 (A) A component for quality assessment activities 
 (described in title V).
 (B) A component for health professional education 
 expenditures.
 (C) A component for administrative costs.
 (D) A component (in this title referred to as the 
 ``operating component'') for operating and other 
 expenditures not described in subparagraphs (A) through 
 (C), consisting of amounts not included in the other 
 components. A State may provide for the allocation of 
 this component between capital expenditures and other 
 expenditures.
 (3) Allocation among components.--Taking into account the 
 State health security budgets established and submitted under 
 section 603, the Board shall allocate the national health 
 security budget among the components in a manner that--
 (A) assures a fair allocation for quality 
 assessment activities (consistent with the national 
 health security spending growth limit); and
 (B) assures that the health professional education 
 expenditure component is sufficient to provide for the 
 amount of health professional education expenditures 
 sufficient to meet the need for covered health care 
 services (consistent with the national health security 
 spending growth limit under subsection (b)(2)).
 (b) Basis for Total Expenditures.--
 (1) In general.--The total expenditures specified in such 
 budget shall be the sum of the capitation amounts computed 
 under section 602(a) and the amount of Federal administrative 
 expenditures needed to carry out this Act.
 (2) National health security spending growth limit.--For 
 purposes of this subtitle, the national health security 
 spending growth limit described in this paragraph for a year is 
 zero, or, if greater, the percentage increase in the gross 
 domestic product (in current dollars) from the first quarter of 
 the second previous year to the first quarter of the previous 
 year.
 (c) Definitions.--In this title:
 (1) Capital expenditures.--The term ``capital 
 expenditures'' means expenses for the purchase, lease, 
 construction, or renovation of capital facilities and for 
 equipment and includes return on equity capital.
 (2) Health professional education expenditures.--The term 
 ``health professional education expenditures'' means 
 expenditures in hospitals and other health care facilities to 
 cover costs associated with teaching and related research 
 activities.

SEC. 602. COMPUTATION OF INDIVIDUAL AND STATE CAPITATION AMOUNTS.

 (a) Capitation Amounts.--
 (1) Individual capitation amounts.--In establishing the 
 national health security budget under section 601(a) and in 
 computing the national average per capita cost under subsection 
 (b) for each year, the Board shall establish a method for 
 computing the capitation amount for each eligible individual 
 residing in each State. The capitation amount for an eligible 
 individual in a State classified within a risk group 
 (established under subsection (d)(2)) is the product of--
 (A) a national average per capita cost for all 
 covered health care services (computed under subsection 
 (b)),
 (B) the State adjustment factor (established under 
 subsection (c)) for the State, and
 (C) the risk adjustment factor (established under 
 subsection (d)) for the risk group.
 (2) State capitation amount.--
 (A) In general.--For purposes of this title, the 
 term ``State capitation amount'' means, for a State for 
 a year, the sum of the capitation amounts computed 
 under paragraph (1) for all the residents of the State 
 in the year, as estimated by the Board before the 
 beginning of the year involved.
 (B) Use of statistical model.--The Board may 
 provide for the computation of State capitation amounts 
 based on statistical models that fairly reflect the 
 elements that comprise the State capitation amount 
 described in subparagraph (A).
 (C) Population information.--The Bureau of the 
 Census shall assist the Board in determining the 
 number, place of residence, and risk group 
 classification of eligible individuals.
 (b) Computation of National Average Per Capita Cost.--
 (1) For 1995.--For 1995, the national average per capita 
 cost under this paragraph is equal to--
 (A) the average per capita health care expenditures 
 in the United States in 1993 (as estimated by the 
 Board),
 (B) increased to 1994 by the Board's estimate of 
 the actual amount of such per capita expenditures 
 during 1994, and
 (C) updated to 1995 by the national health security 
 spending growth limit specified in section 601(b)(2) 
 for 1995.
 (2) For succeeding years.--For each succeeding year, the 
 national average per capita cost under this subsection is equal 
 to the national average per capita cost computed under this 
 subsection for the previous year increased by the national 
 health security spending growth limit (specified in section 
 601(b)(2)) for the year involved.
 (c) State Adjustment Factors.--
 (1) In general.--Subject to the succeeding paragraphs of 
 this subsection, the Board shall develop for each State a 
 factor to adjust the national average per capita costs to 
 reflect differences between the State and the United States 
 in--
 (A) average labor and nonlabor costs that are 
 necessary to provide covered health services;
 (B) any social, environmental, or geographic 
 condition affecting health status or the need for 
 health care services, to the extent such a condition is 
 not taken into account in the establishment of risk 
 groups under subsection (d);
 (C) the geographic distribution of the State's 
 population, particularly the proportion of the 
 population residing in medically underserved areas, to 
 the extent such a condition is not taken into account 
 in the establishment of risk groups under subsection 
 (d); and
 (D) any other factor relating to operating costs 
 required to assure equitable distribution of funds 
 among the States.
 (2) Modification of health professional education 
 component.--With respect to the portion of the national health 
 security budget allocated to expenditures for health 
 professional education, the Board shall modify the State 
 adjustment factors so as to take into account--
 (A) differences among States in health professional 
 education programs in operation as of the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, and
 (B) differences among States in their relative need 
 for expenditures for health professional education, 
 taking into account the health professional education 
 expenditures proposed in State health security budgets 
 under section 603(a).
 (3) Budget neutrality.--The State adjustment factors, as 
 modified under paragraph (2), shall be applied under this 
 subsection in a manner that results in neither an increase nor 
 a decrease in the total amount of the Federal contributions to 
 all State health security programs under subsection (b) as a 
 result of the application of such factors.
 (4) Phase-in.--In applying State adjustment factors under 
 this subsection during the five-year period beginning with 
 1995, the Board shall phase-in, over such period, the use of 
 factors described in paragraph (1) in a manner so that the 
 adjustment factor for a State is based on a blend of such 
 factors and a factor that reflects the relative actual average 
 per capita costs of health services of the different States as 
 of the time of enactment of this Act.
 (5) Periodic adjustment.--In establishing the national 
 health security budget before the beginning of each year, the 
 Board shall provide for appropriate adjustments in the State 
 adjustment factors under this subsection.
 (d) Adjustments for Risk Group Classification.--
 (1) In general.--The Board shall develop an adjustment 
 factor to the national average per capita costs computed under 
 subsection (b) for individuals classified in each risk group 
 (as designated under paragraph (2)) to reflect the difference 
 between the average national average per capita costs and the 
 national average per capita cost for individuals classified in 
 the risk group.
 (2) Risk groups.--The Board shall designate a series of 
 risk groups, determined by age, health indicators, and other 
 factors that represent distinct patterns of health care 
 services utilization and costs.
 (3) Periodic adjustment.--In establishing the national 
 health security budget before the beginning of each year, the 
 Board shall provide for appropriate adjustments in the risk 
 adjustment factors under this subsection.

SEC. 603. STATE HEALTH SECURITY BUDGETS.

 (a) Establishment and Submission of Budgets.--
 (1) In general.--Each State health security program shall 
 establish and submit to the Board for each year a proposed and 
 a final State health security budget, which specifies the 
 following:
 (A) The total expenditures (including expenditures 
 for administrative costs) to be made under the program 
 in the State for covered health care services under 
 this Act, consistent with subsection (b), broken down 
 as follows:
 (i) By the 4 components (described in 
 section 601(a)(2)), consistent with subsection 
 (b).
 (ii) Within the operating component--
 (I) expenditures for operating 
 costs of hospitals and other facility-
 based services in the State,
 (II) expenditures for payment to 
 comprehensive health service 
 organizations,
 (III) expenditures for payment of 
 services provided by health care 
 practitioners, and
 (IV) expenditures for other covered 
 items and services.
 Amounts included in the operating component 
 include amounts that may be used by providers 
 for capital expenditures.
 (B) The total revenues required to meet the State 
 health security expenditures.
 (2) Proposed budget deadline.--The proposed budget for a 
 year shall be submitted under paragraph (1) not later than June 
 1 before the year.
 (3) Final budget.--The final budget for a year shall--
 (A) be established and submitted under paragraph 
 (1) not later than October 1 before the year, and
 (B) take into account the amounts established under 
 the national health security budget under section 601 
 for the year.
 (4) Adjustment in allocations permitted.--
 (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraphs (B) and 
 (C), in the case of a final budget, a State may change 
 the allocation of amounts among components.
 (B) Notice.--No such change may be made unless the 
 State has provided prior notice of the change to the 
 Board.
 (C) Denial.--Such a change may not be made if the 
 Board, within such time period as the Board specifies, 
 disapproves such change.
 (b) Expenditure Limits.--
 (1) In general.--The total expenditures specified in each 
 State health security budget under subsection (a)(1) shall take 
 into account Federal contributions made under section 604.
 (2) Limit on claims processing and billing expenditures.--
 Each State health security budget shall provide that State 
 administrative expenditures, including expenditures for claims 
 processing and billing, shall not exceed 3 percent of the total 
 expenditures under the State health security program, unless 
 the Board determines, on a case-by-case basis, that additional 
 administrative expenditures would improve health care quality 
 and cost effectiveness.
 (3) Worker assistance.--A State health security program may 
 provide that, for budgets for years before 2000, up to 1 
 percent of the budget may be used for purposes of programs 
 providing assistance to workers who are currently performing 
 functions in the administration of the health insurance system 
 and who may experience economic dislocation as a result of the 
 implementation of the program.
 (c) Approval Process for Capital Expenditures Permitted.--Nothing 
in this title shall be construed as preventing a State health security 
program from providing for a process for the approval of capital 
expenditures based on information derived from regional planning 
agencies.

SEC. 604. FEDERAL PAYMENTS TO STATES.

 (a) In General.--Each State with an approved State health security 
program is entitled to receive, from amounts in the National Health 
Security Trust Fund, on a monthly basis each year, of an amount equal 
to one-twelfth of the product of--
 (1) the State capitation amount (computed under section 
 602(a)(2)) for the State for the year, and
 (2) the Federal contribution percentage (established under 
 subsection (b)).
 (b) Federal Contribution Percentage.--The Board shall establish a 
formula for the establishment of a Federal contribution percentage for 
each State. Such formula shall take into consideration a State's per 
capita income and revenue capacity and such other relevant economic 
indicators as the Board determines to be appropriate. In addition, 
during the 5-year period beginning with 1995, the Board may provide for 
a transition adjustment to the formula in order to take into account 
current expenditures by the State (and local governments thereof) for 
health services covered under the State health security program. The 
weighted-average Federal contribution percentage for all States shall 
equal 86 percent and in no event shall such percentage be less than 81 
percent nor more than 91 percent.
 (c) Use of Payments.--All payments made under this section may only 
be used to carry out the State health security program.
 (d) Effect of Spending Excess or Surplus.--
 (1) Spending Excess.--If a State exceeds it's budget in a 
 given year, the State shall continue to fund covered health 
 services from its own revenues.
 (2) Surplus.--If a State provides all covered health 
 services for less than the budgeted amount for a year, it may 
 retain its Federal payment for that year for uses consistent 
 with this Act.

SEC. 605. ACCOUNT FOR HEALTH PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION EXPENDITURES.

 (a) Separate Account.--Each State health security program shall--
 (1) include a separate account for health professional 
 education expenditures, and
 (2) specify the general manner, consistent with subsection 
 (b), in which such expenditures are to be distributed among 
 different types of institutions and the different areas of the 
 State.
 (b) Distribution Rules.--The distribution of funds to hospitals and 
other health care facilities from the account must conform to the 
following principles:
 (1) The disbursement of funds must be consistent with 
 achievement of the national and program goals (specified in 
 section 701(b)) within the State health security program and 
 the distribution of funds from the account must be conditioned 
 upon the receipt of such reports as the Board may require in 
 order to monitor compliance with such goals.
 (2) The distribution of funds from the account must take 
 into account the potentially higher costs of placing health 
 professional students in clinical education programs in health 
 professional shortage areas.

 Subtitle B--Payments by States to Providers

SEC. 611. PAYMENTS TO HOSPITALS AND OTHER FACILITY-BASED SERVICES FOR 
 OPERATING EXPENSES ON THE BASIS OF APPROVED GLOBAL 
 BUDGETS.

 (a) Direct Payment Under Global Budget.--Payment for operating 
expenses for institutional and facility-based care, including hospital 
services and nursing facility services, under State health security 
programs shall be made directly to each institution or facility by each 
State health security program under an annual prospective global budget 
approved under the program. Such a budget shall include payment for 
outpatient care and non-facility-based care that is furnished by or 
through the facility. In the case of a hospital that is wholly owned 
(or controlled) by a comprehensive health service organization that is 
paid under section 614 on the basis of a global budget, the global 
budget of the organization shall include the budget for the hospital.
 (b) Annual Negotiations; Budget Approval.--
 (1) In general.--The prospective global budget for an 
 institution or facility shall be developed through annual 
 negotiations between the State health security program and the 
 institution or facility and be based on a nationally uniform 
 system of cost accounting established under standards of the 
 Board.
 (2) Considerations.--In developing a budget through 
 negotiations, there shall be taken into account at least the 
 following:
 (A) With respect to inpatient hospital services, 
 the number, and classification by diagnosis-related 
 group, of discharges.
 (B) An institution's or facility's past 
 expenditures.
 (C) The extent to which debt service for capital 
 expenditures has been included in the proposed 
 operating budget.
 (D) Change in the consumer price index and other 
 price indices.
 (E) The cost of reasonable compensation to health 
 care practitioners.
 (F) The compensation level of the institution's or 
 facility's workforce.
 (G) The extent to which the institution or facility 
 is providing health care services to meet the needs of 
 residents in the area served by the institution or 
 facility, including the institution's or facility's 
 occupancy level.
 (H) The institution's or facility's previous 
 financial and clinical performance, based on 
 utilization and outcomes data provided under this Act.
 (I) The type of institution or facility, including 
 whether the institution or facility is part of a 
 clinical education program or serves a health 
 professional education, research or other training 
 purpose.
 (J) Technological advances or changes.
 (K) Costs of the institution or facility associated 
 with meeting Federal and State regulations.
 (L) The costs associated with necessary public 
 outreach activities.
 (M) In the case of a for-profit facility, a 
 reasonable rate of return on equity capital, 
 independent of those operating expenses necessary to 
 fulfill the objectives of this Act.
 (N) Incentives to facilities that maintain costs 
 below previous reasonable budgeted levels without 
 reducing the care provided.
 (O) With respect to facilities that provide mental 
 health services and substance abuse treatment services, 
 any additional costs involved in the treatment of 
 dually diagnosed individuals.
 The portion of such a budget that relates to expenditures for 
 health professional education shall be consistent with the 
 State health security budget for such expenditures.
 (3) Provision of required information; diagnosis-related 
 group.--No budget for an institution or facility for a year may 
 be approved unless the institution or facility has submitted on 
 a timely basis to the State health security program such 
 information as the program or the Board shall specify, 
 including in the case of hospitals information on discharges 
 classified by diagnosis-related group.
 (c) Adjustments in Approved Budgets.--
 (1) Adjustments to global budgets that contract with 
 comprehensive health service organizations.--Each State health 
 security program shall develop an administrative mechanism for 
 reducing operating funds to institutions or facilities in 
 proportion to payments made to such institutions or facilities 
 for services contracted for by a comprehensive health service 
 organization.
 (2) Amendments.--In accordance with standards established 
 by the Board, an operating and capital budget approved under 
 this section for a year may be amended before, during, or after 
 the year if there is a substantial change in any of the factors 
 relevant to budget approval.
 (d) Donations Permissible.--The States health security programs may 
permit institutions and facilities to raise funds from private sources 
to pay for newly constructed facilities, major renovations, and 
equipment. The expenditure of such funds, whether for operating or 
capital expenditures, does not obligate the State health security 
program to provide for continued support for such expenditures unless 
included in an approved global budget.

SEC. 612. PAYMENTS TO HEALTH CARE PRACTITIONERS BASED ON PROSPECTIVE 
 FEE SCHEDULE.

 (a) Fee for Service.--
 (1) In general.--Every independent health care practitioner 
 is entitled to be paid, for the provision of covered health 
 services under the State health security program, a fee for 
 each billable covered service.
 (2) Global fee payment methodologies.--The Board shall 
 establish models and encourage State health security programs 
 to implement alternative payment methodologies that incorporate 
 global fees for related services (such as all outpatient 
 procedures for treatment of a condition) or for a basic group 
 of services (such as primary care services) furnished to an 
 individual over a period of time, in order to encourage 
 continuity and efficiency in the provision of services. Such 
 methodologies shall be designed to ensure a high quality of 
 care.
 (3) Billing deadlines; electronic billing.--A State health 
 security program may deny payment for any service of an 
 independent health care practitioner for which it did not 
 receive a bill and appropriate supporting documentation (which 
 had been previously specified) within 30 days after the date 
 the service was provided. Such a program may require that bills 
 for services for which payment may be made under this section, 
 or for any class of such services, be submitted electronically.
 (b) Payment Rates Based on Negotiated Prospective Fee Schedules.--
With respect to any payment method for a class of services of 
practitioners, the State health security program shall establish, on a 
prospective basis, a payment schedule. The State health security 
program may establish such a schedule after negotiations with 
organizations representing the practitioners involved. Such fee 
schedules shall be designed to provide incentives for practitioners to 
choose primary care medicine, including general internal medicine and 
pediatrics, over medical specialization. Nothing in this section shall 
be construed as preventing a State from adjusting the payment schedule 
amounts on a quarterly or other periodic basis depending on whether 
expenditures under the schedule will exceed the budgeted amount with 
respect to such expenditures.
 (c) Billable Covered Service Defined.--In this section, the term 
``billable covered service'' means a service covered under section 201 
for which a practitioner is entitled to compensation by payment of a 
fee determined under this section.

SEC. 613. PAYMENTS TO COMPREHENSIVE HEALTH SERVICE ORGANIZATIONS.

 (a) In General.--Payment under a State health security program to a 
comprehensive health service organization to its enrollees shall be 
determined by the State--
 (1) based on a global budget described in section 611, or
 (2) based on the basic capitation amount described in 
 subsection (b) for each of its enrollees.
 (b) Basic Capitation Amount.--
 (1) In general.--The basic capitation amount described in 
 this subsection for an enrollee shall be determined by the 
 State health security program on the basis of the average 
 amount of expenditures that is estimated would be made under 
 the State health security program for covered health care 
 services for an enrollee, based on actuarial characteristics 
 (as defined by the State health security program).
 (2) Adjustment for special health needs.--The State health 
 security program shall adjust such average amounts to take into 
 account the special health needs, including a disproportionate 
 number of medically underserved individuals, of populations 
 served by the organization.
 (3) Adjustment for services not provided.--The State health 
 security program shall adjust such average amounts to take into 
 account the cost of covered health care services that are not 
 provided by the comprehensive health service organization under 
 section 303(a).

SEC. 614. PAYMENTS FOR COMMUNITY-BASED PRIMARY HEALTH SERVICES.

 (a) In General.--In the case of community-based primary health 
services, subject to subsection (b), payments under a State health 
security program shall--
 (1) be based on a global budget described in section 611,
 (2) be based on the basic primary care capitation amount 
 described in subsection (c) for each individual enrolled with 
 the provider of such services, or
 (3) be made on a fee-for-service basis under section 612.
 (b) Payment Adjustment.--Payments under subsection (a) may include, 
consistent with the budgets developed under this title--
 (1) an additional amount, as set by the State health 
 security program, to cover the costs incurred by a provider 
 which serves persons not covered by this Act whose health care 
 is essential to overall community health and the control of 
 communicable disease, and for whom the cost of such care is 
 otherwise uncompensated,
 (2) an additional amount, as set by the State health 
 security program, to cover the reasonable costs incurred by a 
 provider that furnishes case management services (as defined in 
 section 1915(g)(2) of the Social Security Act), transportation 
 services, and translation services, and
 (3) an additional amount, as set by the State health 
 security program, to cover the costs incurred by a provider in 
 conducting health professional education programs in connection 
 with the provision of such services.
 (c) Basic Primary Care Capitation Amount.--
 (1) In general.--The basic primary care capitation amount 
 described in this subsection for an enrollee with a provider of 
 community-based primary health services shall be determined by 
 the State health security program on the basis of the average 
 amount of expenditures that is estimated would be made under 
 the State health security program for such an enrollee, based 
 on actuarial characteristics (as defined by the State health 
 security program).
 (2) Adjustment for special health needs.--The State health 
 security program shall adjust such average amounts to take into 
 account the special health needs, including a disproportionate 
 number of medically underserved individuals, of populations 
 served by the provider.
 (3) Adjustment for services not provided.--The State health 
 security program shall adjust such average amounts to take into 
 account the cost of community-based primary health services 
 that are not provided by the provider.
 (d) Community-based Primary Health Services Defined.--In this 
section, the term ``community-based primary health services'' has the 
meaning given such term in section 202(a).

SEC. 615. PAYMENTS FOR PRESCRIPTION DRUGS.

 (a) Establishment of List.--
 (1) In general.--Based upon the recommendations of the 
 Advisory Committee on Prescription Drugs under section 403, the 
 Board shall establish a list of approved prescription drugs and 
 biologicals that the Board determines are necessary for the 
 maintenance or restoration of health or of employability or 
 self-management and eligible for coverage under this Act.
 (2) Exclusions.--The Board may exclude reimbursement under 
 this Act for ineffective, unsafe, or over-priced products where 
 better alternatives are determined to be available.
 (b) Prices.--For each such listed prescription drug or biological 
covered under this Act, for insulin, and for medical foods, the Board 
shall from time to time determine a product price or prices which shall 
constitute the maximum to be recognized under this Act as the cost of a 
drug to a provider thereof. The Board may conduct negotiations, on 
behalf of State health security programs, with product manufacturers 
and distributors in determining the applicable product price or prices.
 (c) Charges by Independent Pharmacies.--Each State health security 
program shall provide for payment for a prescription drug or biological 
or insulin furnished by an independent pharmacy based on the drug's 
cost to the pharmacy (not in excess of the applicable product price 
established under subsection (b)) plus a dispensing fee. In accordance 
with standards established by the Board, each State health security 
program, after consultation with representatives of the pharmaceutical 
profession, shall establish schedules of dispensing fees, designed to 
afford reasonable compensation to independent pharmacies after taking 
into account variations in their cost of operation resulting from 
regional differences, differences in the volume of prescription drugs 
dispensed, differences in services provided, the need to maintain 
expenditures within the budgets established under this title, and other 
relevant factors.

SEC. 616. PAYMENTS FOR APPROVED DEVICES AND EQUIPMENT.

 (a) Establishment of List.--The Board shall establish a list of 
approved durable medical equipment and therapeutic devices and 
equipment (including eyeglasses, hearing aids, and prosthetic 
appliances), that the Board determines are necessary for the 
maintenance or restoration of health or of employability or self-
management and eligible for coverage under this Act.
 (b) Considerations and Conditions.--In establishing the list under 
subsection (a), the Board shall take into consideration the efficacy, 
safety, and cost of each item contained on such list, and shall attach 
to any item such conditions as the Board determines appropriate with 
respect to the circumstances under which, or the frequency with which, 
the item may be prescribed.
 (c) Prices.--For each such listed item covered under this Act, the 
Board shall from time to time determine a product price or prices which 
shall constitute the maximum to be recognized under this Act as the 
cost of the item to a provider thereof. The Board may conduct 
negotiations, on behalf of State health security programs, with 
equipment and device manufacturers and distributors in determining the 
applicable product price or prices.
 (d) Exclusions.--The Board may exclude from coverage under this Act 
ineffective, unsafe, or overpriced products where better alternatives 
are determined to be available.

SEC. 617. PAYMENTS FOR OTHER ITEMS AND SERVICES.

 In the case of payment for other covered health services, the 
amount of payment under a State health security program shall be 
established by the program--
 (1) in accordance with payment methodologies which are 
 specified by the Board, after consultation with the American 
 Health Security Advisory Council, or methodologies established 
 by the State under section 620, and
 (2) consistent with the State health security budget.

SEC. 618. PAYMENT INCENTIVES FOR MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED AREAS.

 (a) Model Payment Methodologies.--In addition to the payment 
amounts otherwise provided in this title, the Board shall establish 
model payment methodologies and other incentives that promote the 
provision of covered health care services in medically underserved 
areas, particularly in rural and inner-city underserved areas.
 (b) Construction.--Nothing in this title shall be construed as 
limiting the authority of State health security programs to increase 
payment amounts or otherwise provide additional incentives, consistent 
with the State health security budget, to encourage the provision of 
medically necessary and appropriate services in underserved areas.

SEC. 619. AUTHORITY FOR ALTERNATIVE PAYMENT METHODOLOGIES.

 A State health security program, as part of its plan under section 
405(a), may use a payment methodology other than a methodology required 
under this subtitle so long as--
 (1) such payment methodology does not affect the 
 entitlement of individuals to coverage, the weighting of fee 
 schedules to encourage an increase in the number of primary 
 care providers, the ability of individuals to choose among 
 qualified providers, the benefits covered under the program, or 
 the compliance of the program with the State health security 
 budget under subtitle A, and
 (2) the program submits periodic reports to the Board 
 showing the operation and effectiveness of the alternative 
 methodology, in order for the Board to evaluate the 
 appropriateness of applying the alternative methodology to 
 other States.

 Subtitle C--Mandatory Assignment and Administrative Provisions

SEC. 631. MANDATORY ASSIGNMENT.

 (a) No Balance Billing.--Payments for benefits under this Act shall 
constitute payment in full for such benefits and the entity furnishing 
an item or service for which payment is made under this Act shall 
accept such payment as payment in full for the item or service and may 
not accept any payment or impose any charge for any such item or 
service other than accepting payment from the State health security 
program in accordance with this Act.
 (b) Enforcement.--If an entity knowingly and willfully bills for an 
item or service or accepts payment in violation of subsection (a), the 
Board may apply sanctions against the entity in the same manner as 
sanctions could have been imposed under section 1842(j)(2) of the 
Social Security Act for a violation of section 1842(j)(1) of such Act. 
Such sanctions are in addition to any sanctions that a State may impose 
under its State health security program.

SEC. 632. PROCEDURES FOR REIMBURSEMENT; APPEALS.

 (a) Procedures for Reimbursement.--In accordance with standards 
issued by the Board, a State health security program shall establish a 
timely and administratively simple procedure to assure payment within 
60 days of the date of submission of clean claims by providers under 
this Act.
 (b) Appeals Process.--Each State health security program shall 
establish an appeals process to handle all grievances pertaining to 
payment to providers under this title.

 TITLE VII--PROMOTION OF PRIMARY HEALTH CARE; DEVELOPMENT OF HEALTH 
 SERVICE CAPACITY; PROGRAMS TO ASSIST THE MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED

 Subtitle A--Promotion and Expansion of Primary Care Professional 
 Training

SEC. 701. ROLE OF BOARD; ESTABLISHMENT OF PRIMARY CARE PROFESSIONAL 
 OUTPUT GOALS.

 (a) In General.--The Board is responsible for--
 (1) coordinating health professional education policies and 
 goals, in consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human 
 Services (in this title referred to as the ``Secretary''), to 
 achieve the national goals specified in subsection (b);
 (2) overseeing the health professional education 
 expenditures of the State health security programs from the 
 account established under section 602(c);
 (3) developing and maintaining, in cooperation with the 
 Secretary, a system to monitor the number and specialties of 
 individuals through their health professional education, any 
 postgraduate training, and professional practice; and
 (4) developing, coordinating, and promoting other policies 
 that expand the number of primary care practitioners.
 (b) National Goals.--The national goals specified in this 
subsection are as follows:
 (1) Graduate medical education.--By not later than 5 years 
 after the date of the enactment of this Act, at least 50 
 percent of the residents in medical residency education 
 programs (as defined in subsection (e)(1)) are primary care 
 residents (as defined in subsection (e)(3)).
 (2) Midlevel primary care practitioners.--To assure an 
 adequate supply of primary care practitioners, there shall be a 
 number, specified by the Board, of midlevel primary care 
 practitioners (as defined in subsection (e)(2)) employed in the 
 health care system as of January 1, 2000.
 (c) Method for Attainment of National Goal for Graduate Medical 
Education; Program Goals.--
 (1) In general.--The Board shall establish a method of 
 applying the national goal in subsection (b)(1) to program 
 goals for each medical residency education program or to 
 medical residency education consortia.
 (2) Consideration.--The program goals under paragraph (1) 
 shall be based on the distribution of medical schools and other 
 teaching facilities within each State health security program, 
 and the number of positions for graduate medical education.
 (3) Medical residency education consortium.--In this 
 subsection, the term ``medical residency education consortium'' 
 means a consortium of medical residency education programs in a 
 contiguous geographic area (which may be an interstate area) if 
 the consortium--
 (A) includes at least one medical school with a 
 teaching hospital and related teaching settings, and
 (B) has an affiliation with qualified community-
 based primary health service providers described in 
 section 202(a) and with at least one comprehensive 
 health service organization established under section 
 303.
 (4) Enforcement through state health security budgets.--The 
 Board shall develop a formula for reducing payments to State 
 health security programs (that provide for payments to a 
 medical residency education program) that failed to meet the 
 goal for the program established under this subsection.
 (d) Method for Attainment of National Goal for Midlevel Primary 
Care Practitioners.--To assist in attaining the national goal 
identified in subsection (b)(2), the Board shall--
 (1) advise the Public Health Service on allocations of 
 funding under titles VII and VIII of the Public Health Service 
 Act, the National Health Service Corps, and other programs in 
 order to increase the supply of midlevel primary care 
 practitioners, and
 (2) commission a study of the potential benefits and 
 disadvantages of expanding the scope of practice authorized 
 under State laws for any class of midlevel primary care 
 practitioners.
 (e) Definitions.--In this title:
 (1) Medical residency education program.--The term 
 ``medical residency education program'' means a program that 
 provides education and training to graduates of medical schools 
 in order to meet requirements for licensing and certification 
 as a physician, and includes the medical school supervising the 
 program and includes the hospital or other facility in which 
 the program is operated.
 (2) Midlevel primary care practitioner.--The term 
 ``midlevel primary care practitioner'' means a clinical nurse 
 practitioner, certified nurse midwife, physician assistance, or 
 other non-physician practitioner, specified by the Board, as 
 authorized to practice under State law.
 (3) Primary care resident.--The term ``primary care 
 resident'' means (in accordance with criteria established by 
 the Board) a resident being trained in a distinct program of 
 family practice medicine, general practice, general internal 
 medicine, or general pediatrics.

SEC. 702. ESTABLISHMENT OF ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON HEALTH PROFESSIONAL 
 EDUCATION.

 (a) In General.--The Board shall provide for an Advisory Committee 
on Health Professional Education (in this section referred to as the 
``Committee'') to advise the Board on its activities under section 701.
 (b) Membership.--The Committee shall be composed of--
 (1) the Chair of the Board, who shall serve as Chair of the 
 Committee, and
 (2) 12 members, not otherwise in the employ of the United 
 States, appointed by the Board without regard to the provisions 
 of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the 
 competitive service.
The appointed members shall provide a balanced point of view with 
respect to health professional education, primary care disciplines, and 
health care policy and shall include individuals who are representative 
of medical schools, other health professional schools, residency 
programs, primary care practitioners, teaching hospitals, professional 
associations, public health organizations, State health security 
programs, and consumers.
 (c) Terms of Members.--Each appointed member shall hold office for 
a term of five years, except that--
 (1) any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring during 
 the term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall 
 be appointed for the remainder of that term; and
 (2) the terms of the members first taking office shall 
 expire, as designated by the Board at the time of appointment, 
 two at the end of the second year, two at the end of the third 
 year, two at the end of the fourth year, and three at the end 
 of the fifth year after the date of enactment of this Act.
 (d) Vacancies.--
 (1) In general.--The Board shall fill any vacancy in the 
 membership of the Committee in the same manner as the original 
 appointment. The vacancy shall not affect the power of the 
 remaining members to execute the duties of the Committee.
 (2) Vacancy appointments.--Any member appointed to fill a 
 vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the term for which the 
 predecessor of the member was appointed.
 (3) Reappointment.--The Board may reappoint an appointed 
 member of the Committee for a second term in the same manner as 
 the original appointment.
 (e) Duties.--It shall be the duty of the Committee to advise the 
Board concerning graduate medical education policies under this title.
 (f) Staff.--The Committee, its members, and any committees of the 
Committee shall be provided with such secretarial, clerical, or other 
assistance as may be authorized by the Board for carrying out their 
respective functions.
 (g) Meetings.--The Committee shall meet as frequently as the Board 
deems necessary, but not less than 4 times each year. Upon request by 
four or more members it shall be the duty of the Chair to call a 
meeting of the Committee.
 (h) Compensation.--Members of the Committee shall be reimbursed by 
the Board for travel and per diem in lieu of subsistence expenses 
during the performance of duties of the Board in accordance with 
subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.
 (i) FACA Not Applicable.--The provisions of the Federal Advisory 
Committee Act shall not apply to the Committee.

SEC. 703. GRANTS FOR HEALTH PROFESSIONS EDUCATION, NURSE EDUCATION, AND 
 THE NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE CORPS.

 (a) Transfers to Public Health Service.--From the amounts provided 
under subsection (c), the Board shall make transfers from the American 
Health Security Trust Fund to the Public Health Service under subpart 
II of part D of title III, title VII, and title VIII of the Public 
Health Service Act for the support of the National Health Service 
Corps, health professions education, and nursing education, including 
education of clinical nurse practitioners, certified registered nurse 
anesthetists, certified nurse midwives, and physician assistants. Of 
the amounts so transferred in each year, not less than 50 percent shall 
be expended for the support of the National Health Service Corps.
 (b) Range of Funds.--The amount of transfers under subsection (a) 
for any fiscal year shall be an amount (specified by the Board each 
year) not less than \4/100\ percent and not to exceed \6/100\ percent 
of the amounts the Board estimates will be expended from the Trust Fund 
in the fiscal year.
 (c) Funds Supplemental to Other Funds.--The funds provided under 
this section with respect to provision of services are in addition to, 
and not in replacement of, funds made available under the provisions 
referred to in subsection (a) and shall be administered in accordance 
with the terms of such provisions. The Board shall make no transfer of 
funds under this section for any fiscal year for which the total 
appropriations for the programs authorized by such provisions are less 
than the total amount appropriated for such programs in fiscal year 
1993.

 Subtitle B--Direct Health Care Delivery

SEC. 711. SETASIDE FOR PUBLIC HEALTH BLOCK GRANTS.

 (a) Transfers to Public Health Service.--From the amounts provided 
under subsection (c), the Board shall make transfers from the American 
Health Security Trust Fund to the Public Health Service for the 
following purposes:
 (1) For payments to States under the maternal and child 
 health block grants under title V of the Social Security Act.
 (2) Preventive health block grants under part A of title 
 XIX of the Public Health Service Act.
 (3) Grants to States for community mental health services 
 under subpart I of part B of title XIX of the Public Health 
 Service Act.
 (4) Grants to States for prevention and treatment of 
 substance abuse under subpart II of part B of title XIX of the 
 Public Health Service Act.
 (5) Grants for HIV health care services under parts A, B, 
 and C of title XXVI of the Public Health Service Act.
 (b) Range of Funds.--The amount of transfers under subsection (a) 
for any fiscal year shall be an amount (specified by the Board each 
year) not less than \1/10\ percent and not to exceed \14/100\ percent 
of the amounts the Board estimates will be expended from the Trust Fund 
in the fiscal year.
 (c) Funds Supplemental to Other Funds.--The funds provided under 
this section with respect to provision of services are in addition to, 
and not in replacement of, funds made available under the programs 
referred to in subsection (a) and shall be administered in accordance 
with the terms of such programs. The Board shall make no transfer of 
funds under this section for any fiscal year for which the total 
appropriations for such programs are less than the total amount 
appropriated for such programs in fiscal year 1993.

SEC. 712. SETASIDE FOR PRIMARY HEALTH CARE DELIVERY.

 (a) Transfers to Public Health Service.--From the amounts provided 
under subsection (c), the Board shall make transfers from the American 
Health Security Trust Fund to the Public Health Service for the program 
of primary care service expansion grants under subpart V of part D of 
title III of the Public Health Service Act (as added by section 713 of 
this Act).
 (b) Range of Funds.--The amount of transfers under subsection (a) 
for any fiscal year shall be an amount (specified by the Board each 
year) not less than \6/100\ percent and not to exceed \1/10\ percent of 
the amounts the Board estimates will be expended from the Trust Fund in 
the fiscal year.
 (c) Funds Supplemental to Other Funds.--The funds provided under 
this section with respect to provision of services are in addition to, 
and not in replacement of, funds made available under the sections 329, 
330, 340, 340A, 1001, and 2655 of the Public Health Service Act. The 
Board shall make no transfer of funds under this section for any fiscal 
year for which the total appropriations for such sections are less than 
the total amount appropriated under such sections in fiscal year 1993.

SEC. 713. PRIMARY CARE SERVICE EXPANSION GRANTS.

 Part D of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
254b et seq.) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new 
subpart:

 ``Subpart V--Primary Care Expansion

``SEC. 340D. EXPANDING PRIMARY CARE DELIVERY CAPACITY IN URBAN AND 
 RURAL AREAS.

 ``(a) Grants for Primary Care Centers.--From the amounts described 
in subsection (c), the American Health Security Standards Board shall 
make grants to public and nonprofit private entities for projects to 
plan and develop primary care centers which will serve medically 
underserved populations (as defined in section 330(b)(3)) in urban and 
rural areas and to deliver primary care services to such populations in 
such areas. The funds provided under such a grant may be used for the 
same purposes for which a grant may be made under subsection (c) or (d) 
of section 330.
 ``(b) Process of Awarding Grants.--The provisions of subsection 
(e)(1) of section 330 shall apply to a grant under this section in the 
same manner as they apply to a grant under subsection (c) of such 
section. The provisions of subsection (g)(3) of such section shall 
apply to grants for projects to plan and develop primary care centers 
under this section in the same manner as they apply to grants under 
such section.
 ``(c) Funding as Set-Aside From Trust Fund.--Funding to carry out 
this section is provided from the American Health Security Trust Fund 
in accordance with section 912 of the American Health Security Act.
 ``(d) Primary Care Center Defined.--In this section, the term 
`primary care center' means--
 ``(1) a migrant health center (as defined in section 
 329(a)(1)),
 ``(2) a community health center (as defined in section 
 330(a)),
 ``(3) an entity qualified to receive a grant under section 
 340, 340A, 1001, or 2655, or
 ``(4) a Federally-qualified health center (as defined in 
 section 1905(l)(2)(B) of the Social Security Act).''.

 Subtitle C--Primary Care and Outcomes Research

SEC. 721. SET-ASIDE FOR OUTCOMES RESEARCH.

 (a) Grants for Outcomes Research.--From the amounts provided under 
subsection (c), the Board shall make transfers from the Trust Fund to 
the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research under title IX of the 
Public Health Service Act for the purpose of carrying out activities 
under such title.
 (b) Range of Funds.--The amount of transfers under subsection (a) 
for any fiscal year shall be an amount (specified by the Board each 
year) not less than \1/100\ percent and not to exceed \2/100\ percent 
of the amounts the Board estimates will be expended from the Trust Fund 
in the fiscal year.
 (c) Funds Supplemental to Other Funds.--The funds provided under 
this section with respect to provision of services are in addition to, 
and not in replacement of, funds made available to the Agency for 
Health Care Policy and Research under section 926 of the Public Health 
Service Act. The Board shall make no transfer of funds under this 
section for any fiscal year for which the total appropriations under 
such section are less than the total amount appropriated under such 
section and title in fiscal year 1993.
 (d) Conforming Amendment.--Section 926(a) of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 299c-5(a)) is amended by striking 
``$35,000,000'' and all that follows through the end and inserting 
``for each fiscal year (beginning with fiscal year 1994) such sums as 
may be necessary.''.

SEC. 722. OFFICE OF PRIMARY CARE AND PREVENTION RESEARCH.

 (a) In General.--Title IV of the Public Health Service Act, as 
amended by section 2 of Public Law 101-613, is amended--
 (1) by redesignating section 486 as section 485A;
 (2) by redesignating parts F through H as parts G through 
 I, respectively; and
 (3) by inserting after part E the following new part:

 ``Part F--Research on Primary Care and Prevention

``SEC. 486. OFFICE OF PRIMARY CARE AND PREVENTION RESEARCH.

 ``(a) Establishment.--There is established within the Office of the 
Director of NIH an office to be known as the Office of Primary Care and 
Prevention Research (in this part referred to as the `Office'). The 
Office shall be headed by a director, who shall be appointed by the 
Director of NIH.
 ``(b) Purpose.--The Director of the Office shall--
 ``(1) identify projects of research on primary care and 
 prevention that should be conducted or supported by the 
 national research institutes, with particular emphasis on--
 ``(A) clinical patient care,
 ``(B) diagnostic effectiveness,
 ``(C) primary care education,
 ``(D) health and family planning services,
 ``(E) medical effectiveness outcomes of primary 
 care procedures and interventions,
 ``(F) the use of multidisciplinary teams of health 
 care practitioners.
 ``(2) identify multidisciplinary research related to 
 primary care and prevention that should be so conducted;
 ``(3) promote coordination and collaboration among entities 
 conducting research identified under any of paragraphs (1) and 
 (2);
 ``(4) encourage the conduct of such research by entities 
 receiving funds from the national research institutes;
 ``(5) recommend an agenda for conducting and supporting 
 such research;
 ``(6) promote the sufficient allocation of the resources of 
 the national research institutes for conducting and supporting 
 such research; and
 ``(7) prepare the report required in section 486B.
 ``(c) Primary Care and Prevention Research Defined.--For purposes 
of this part, the term `primary care and prevention research' means 
research on improvement of the practice of family medicine, general 
internal medicine, and general pediatrics, and includes research 
relating to--
 ``(1) obstetrics and gynecology, dentistry, or mental 
 health or substance abuse treatment when provided by a primary 
 care physician or other primary care practitioner, and
 ``(2) primary care provided by multidisciplinary teams.

``SEC. 486A. NATIONAL DATA SYSTEM AND CLEARINGHOUSE ON PRIMARY CARE AND 
 PREVENTION RESEARCH.

 ``(a) Data System.--The Director of NIH, in consultation with the 
Director of the Office, shall establish a data system for the 
collection, storage, analysis, retrieval, and dissemination of 
information regarding primary care and prevention research that is 
conducted or supported by the national research institutes. Information 
from the data system shall be available through information systems 
available to health care professionals and providers, researchers, and 
members of the public.
 ``(b) Clearinghouse.--The Director of NIH, in consultation with the 
Director of the Office and with the National Library of Medicine, shall 
establish, maintain, and operate a program to provide, and encourage 
the use of, information on research and prevention activities of the 
national research institutes that relate to primary care and prevention 
research.

``SEC. 486B. BIENNIAL REPORT.

 ``(a) In General.--With respect to primary care and prevention 
research, the Director of the Office shall, not later than one year 
after the date of the enactment of this part, and biennially 
thereafter, prepare a report--
 ``(1) describing and evaluating the progress made during 
 the preceding two fiscal years in research and treatment 
 conducted or supported by the National Institutes of Health;
 ``(2) summarizing and analyzing expenditures made by the 
 agencies of such Institutes (and by such Office) during the 
 preceding two fiscal years; and
 ``(3) making such recommendations for legislative and 
 administrative initiatives as the Director of the Office 
 determines to be appropriate.
 ``(b) Inclusion in Biennial Report of Director of NIH.--The 
Director of the Office shall submit each report prepared under 
subsection (a) to the Director of NIH for inclusion in the report 
submitted to the President and the Congress under section 403.''.
 (b) Requirement of Sufficient Allocation of Resources of 
Institutes.--Section 402(b) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 
282(b)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (10), by striking ``and'' after the 
 semicolon at the end;
 (2) in paragraph (11), by striking the period at the end 
 and inserting ``; and''; and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (11) the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(12) after consultation with the Director of the Office 
 of Primary Care and Prevention Research, shall ensure that 
 resources of the National Institutes of Health are sufficiently 
 allocated for projects on primary care and prevention research 
 that are identified under section 486(b).''.
 (c) Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 408 of the Public 
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 284(a)) is amended by adding at the end 
the following new paragraph:
 ``(3) For the Office of Primary Care and Prevention 
 Research, there are authorized to be appropriated $150,000,000 
 for fiscal year 1994, $180,000,000 for fiscal year 1995, and 
 $216,000,000 for fiscal year 1996.''.
 (d) Conforming Amendment.--Section 485(g) of the Public Health 
Service Act (42 U.S.C. 287c-2(g)) is amended by striking ``section 
486'' and inserting ``section 485A''.

 Subtitle D--School-Related Health Services

SEC. 731. AUTHORIZATIONS OF APPROPRIATIONS.

 (a) Funding for School-Related Health Services.--For the purpose of 
carrying out this subtitle, there are authorized to be appropriated 
$100,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, $275,000,000 for fiscal year 1998, 
$350,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, and $400,000,000 for each of the 
fiscal years 2000 and 2001.
 (b) Relation to Other Funds.--The authorizations of appropriations 
established in subsection (a) are in addition to any other 
authorizations of appropriations that are available for the purpose 
described in such subsection.

SEC. 732. ELIGIBILITY FOR DEVELOPMENT AND OPERATION GRANTS.

 (a) In General.--Entities eligible to apply for and receive grants 
under section 734 or 735 are the following:
 (1) State health agencies that apply on behalf of local 
 community partnerships and other communities in need of health 
 services for school-aged children within the State.
 (2) Local community partnerships in States in which health 
 agencies have not applied.
 (b) Local Community Partnerships.--
 (1) In general.--A local community partnership under 
 subsection (a)(2) is an entity that, at a minimum, includes--
 (A) a local health care provider with experience in 
 delivering services to school-aged children;
 (B) one or more local public schools; and
 (C) at least one community based organization 
 located in the community to be served that has a 
 history of providing services to school-aged children 
 in the community who are at-risk.
 (2) Participation.--A partnership described in paragraph 
 (1) shall, to the maximum extent feasible, involve broad based 
 community participation from parents and adolescent children to 
 be served, health and social service providers, teachers and 
 other public school and school board personnel, development and 
 service organizations for adolescent children, and interested 
 business leaders. Such participation may be evidenced through 
 an expanded partnership, or an advisory board to such 
 partnership.
 (c) Definitions Regarding Children.--For purposes of this subtitle:
 (1) The term ``adolescent children'' means school-aged 
 children who are adolescents.
 (2) The term ``school-aged children'' means individuals who 
 are between the ages of 4 and 19 (inclusive).

SEC. 733. PREFERENCES.

 (a) In General.--In making grants under sections 734 and 735, the 
Secretary shall give preference to applicants whose communities to be 
served show the most substantial level of need for such services among 
school-aged children, as measured by indicators of community health 
including the following:
 (1) High levels of poverty.
 (2) The presence of a medically underserved population.
 (3) The presence of a health professional shortage area.
 (4) High rates of indicators of health risk among school-
 aged children, including a high proportion of such children 
 receiving services through the Individuals with Disabilities 
 Education Act, adolescent pregnancy, sexually transmitted 
 disease (including infection with the human immunodeficiency 
 virus), preventable disease, communicable disease, intentional 
 and unintentional injuries, community and gang violence, 
 unemployment among adolescent children, juvenile justice 
 involvement, and high rates of drug and alcohol exposure.
 (b) Linkage to Community Health Centers.--In making grants under 
sections 734 and 735, the Secretary shall give preference to applicants 
that demonstrate a linkage to community health centers.

SEC. 734. GRANTS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF PROJECTS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary may make grants to State health 
agencies or to local community partnerships to develop school health 
service sites.
 (b) Use of Funds.--A project for which a grant may be made under 
subsection (a) may include but not be limited to the cost of the 
following:
 (1) Planning for the provision of school health services.
 (2) Recruitment, compensation, and training of health and 
 administrative staff.
 (3) The development of agreements, and the acquisition and 
 development of equipment and information services, necessary to 
 support information exchange between school health service 
 sites and health plans, health providers, and other entities 
 authorized to collect information under this Act.
 (4) Other activities necessary to assume operational 
 status.
 (c) Application for Grant.--
 (1) In general.--Applicants shall submit applications in a 
 form and manner prescribed by the Secretary.
 (2) Applications by State health agencies.--
 (A) In the case of applicants that are State health 
 agencies, the application shall contain assurances that 
 the State health agency is applying for funds--
 (i) on behalf of at least one local 
 community partnership; and
 (ii) on behalf of at least one other 
 community identified by the State as in need of 
 the services funded under this subtitle but 
 without a local community partnership.
 (B) In the case of the communities identified in 
 applications submitted by State health agencies that do 
 not yet have local community partnerships (including 
 the community identified under subparagraph (A)(ii)), 
 the State shall describe the steps that will be taken 
 to aid the communities in developing a local community 
 partnership.
 (C) A State applying on behalf of local community 
 partnerships and other communities may retain not more 
 than 10 percent of grants awarded under this subtitle 
 for administrative costs.
 (d) Contents of Application.--In order to receive a grant under 
this section, an applicant must include in the application the 
following information:
 (1) An assessment of the need for school health services in 
 the communities to be served, using the latest available health 
 data and health goals and objectives established by the 
 Secretary.
 (2) A description of how the applicant will design the 
 proposed school health services to reach the maximum number of 
 school-aged children who are at risk.
 (3) An explanation of how the applicant will integrate its 
 services with those of other health and social service programs 
 within the community.
 (4) A description of a quality assurance program which 
 complies with standards that the Secretary may prescribe.
 (e) Number of Grants.--Not more than one planning grant may be made 
to a single applicant. A planning grant may not exceed two years in 
duration.

SEC. 735. GRANTS FOR OPERATION OF PROJECTS.

 (a) In General.--The Secretary may make grants to State health 
agencies or to local community partnerships for the cost of operating 
school health service sites.
 (b) Use of Grant.--The costs for which a grant may be made under 
this section include but are not limited to the following:
 (1) The cost of furnishing health services that are not 
 otherwise covered under this Act or by any other public or 
 private insurer.
 (2) The cost of furnishing services whose purpose is to 
 increase the capacity of individuals to utilize available 
 health services, including transportation, community and 
 patient outreach, patient education, translation services, and 
 such other services as the Secretary determines to be 
 appropriate in carrying out such purpose.
 (3) Training, recruitment and compensation of health 
 professionals and other staff.
 (4) Outreach services to school-aged children who are at-
 risk and to the parents of such children.
 (5) Linkage of individuals to health plans, community 
 health services and social services.
 (6) Other activities deemed necessary by the Secretary.
 (c) Application for Grant.--Applicants shall submit applications in 
a form and manner prescribed by the Secretary. In order to receive a 
grant under this section, an applicant must include in the application 
the following information:
 (1) A description of the services to be furnished by the 
 applicant.
 (2) The amounts and sources of funding that the applicant 
 will expend, including estimates of the amount of payments the 
 applicant will receive from sources other than the grant.
 (3) Such other information as the Secretary determines to 
 be appropriate.
 (d) Additional Contents of Application.--In order to receive a 
grant under this section, an applicant must meet the following 
conditions:
 (1) The applicant furnishes the following services:
 (A) Diagnosis and treatment of simple illnesses and 
 minor injuries.
 (B) Preventive health services, including health 
 screenings.
 (C) Services provided for the purpose described in 
 subsection (b)(2).
 (D) Referrals and followups in situations involving 
 illness or injury.
 (E) Health and social services, counseling 
 services, and necessary referrals, including referrals 
 regarding mental health and substance abuse.
 (F) Such other services as the Secretary determines 
 to be appropriate.
 (2) The applicant is a participating provider in the 
 State's program for medical assistance under title XIX of the 
 Social Security Act.
 (3) The applicant does not impose charges on students or 
 their families for services (including collection of any cost-
 sharing for services under the comprehensive benefit package 
 that otherwise would be required).
 (4) The applicant has reviewed and will periodically review 
 the needs of the population served by the applicant in order to 
 ensure that its services are accessible to the maximum number 
 of school-aged children in the area, and that, to the maximum 
 extent possible, barriers to access to services of the 
 applicant are removed (including barriers resulting from the 
 area's physical characteristics, its economic, social and 
 cultural grouping, the health care utilization patterns of such 
 children, and available transportation).
 (5) In the case of an applicant which serves a population 
 that includes a substantial proportion of individuals of 
 limited English speaking ability, the applicant has developed a 
 plan to meet the needs of such population to the extent 
 practicable in the language and cultural context most 
 appropriate to such individuals.
 (6) The applicant will provide non-Federal contributions 
 toward the cost of the project in an amount determined by the 
 Secretary.
 (7) The applicant will operate a quality assurance program 
 consistent with section 734(d).
 (e) Duration of Grant.--A grant under this section shall be for a 
period determined by the Secretary.
 (f) Reports.--A recipient of funding under this section shall 
provide such reports and information as are required in regulations of 
the Secretary.

SEC. 736. FEDERAL ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS.

 Of the amounts made available under section 731, the Secretary may 
reserve not more than 5 percent for administrative expenses regarding 
this subtitle.

SEC. 737. DEFINITIONS.

 For purposes of this subtitle:
 (1) The term ``adolescent children'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 732(c).
 (2) The term ``at risk'' means at-risk with respect to 
 health.
 (3) The term ``community health center'' has the meaning 
 given such term in section 330 of the Public Health Service 
 Act.
 (4) The term ``health professional shortage area'' means a 
 health professional shortage area designated under section 332 
 of the Public Health Service Act.
 (5) The term ``medically underserved population'' has the 
 meaning given such term in section 330 of the Public Health 
 Service Act.
 (6) The term ``school-aged children'' has the meaning given 
 such term in section 732(c).

 TITLE VIII--FINANCING PROVISIONS; AMERICAN HEALTH SECURITY TRUST FUND

SEC. 800. AMENDMENT OF 1986 CODE; SECTION 15 NOT TO APPLY.

 (a) Amendment of 1986 Code.--Except as otherwise expressly 
provided, whenever in this title an amendment or repeal is expressed in 
terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, 
the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other 
provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (b) Section 15 Not To Apply.--The amendments made by subtitle B 
shall not be treated as a change in a rate of tax for purposes of 
section 15 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.

 Subtitle A--American Health Security Trust Fund

SEC. 801. AMERICAN HEALTH SECURITY TRUST FUND.

 (a) In General.--There is hereby created on the books of the 
Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the American 
Health Security Trust Fund (in this section referred to as the ``Trust 
Fund''). The Trust Fund shall consist of such gifts and bequests as may 
be made and such amounts as may be deposited in, or appropriated to, 
such Trust Fund as provided in this Act.
 (b) Appropriations Into Trust Fund.--
 (1) Taxes.--There are hereby appropriated to the Trust Fund 
 for each fiscal year (beginning with fiscal year 1995), out of 
 any moneys in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, amounts 
 equivalent to 100 percent of the aggregate increase in tax 
 liabilities under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 which is 
 attributable to the application of the amendments made by this 
 title. The amounts appropriated by the preceding sentence shall 
 be transferred from time to time (but not less frequently than 
 monthly) from the general fund in the Treasury to the Trust 
 Fund, such amounts to be determined on the basis of estimates 
 by the Secretary of the Treasury of the taxes paid to or 
 deposited into the Treasury; and proper adjustments shall be 
 made in amounts subsequently transferred to the extent prior 
 estimates were in excess of or were less than the amounts that 
 should have been so transferred.
 (2) Current program receipts.--Notwithstanding any other 
 provision of law, there are hereby appropriated to the Trust 
 Fund for each fiscal year (beginning with fiscal year 1995) the 
 amounts that would otherwise have been appropriated to carry 
 out the following programs:
 (A) The medicare program, under parts A and B of 
 title XVIII of the Social Security Act (other than 
 amounts attributable to any premiums under such parts).
 (B) The medicaid program, under State plans 
 approved under title XIX of such Act.
 (C) The Federal employees health benefit program, 
 under chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code.
 (D) The CHAMPUS program, under chapter 55 of title 
 10, United States Code.
 (E) The maternal and child health program (under 
 title V of the Social Security Act), vocational 
 rehabilitation programs, programs for drug abuse and 
 mental health services under the Public Health Service 
 Act, programs providing general hospital or medical 
 assistance, and any other Federal program identified by 
 the Board, in consultation with the Secretary of the 
 Treasury, to the extent the programs provide for 
 payment for health services the payment of which may be 
 made under this Act.
 (c) Incorporation of Provisions.--The provisions of subsections (b) 
through (i) of section 1817 of the Social Security Act shall apply to 
the Trust Fund under this Act in the same manner as they applied to the 
Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund under part A of title XVIII of 
such Act, except that the American Health Security Standards Board 
shall constitute the Board of Trustees of the Trust Fund.
 (d) Transfer of Funds.--Any amounts remaining in the Federal 
Hospital Insurance Trust Fund or the Federal Supplementary Medical 
Insurance Trust Fund after the settlement of claims for payments under 
title XVIII have been completed, shall be transferred into the American 
Health Security Trust Fund.

 Subtitle B--Taxes Based on Income and Wages

SEC. 811. PAYROLL TAX ON EMPLOYERS.

 (a) In General.--Section 3111 (relating to tax on employers) is 
amended by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d) and by 
inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection:
 ``(c) Health Care.--
 ``(1) In general.--In addition to other taxes, there is 
 hereby imposed on every employer an excise tax, with respect to 
 having individuals in his employ, equal to the applicable 
 percentage of the wages (as defined in section 3121(a)) paid by 
 him with respect to employment (as defined in section 3121(b)).
 ``(2) Applicable percentage.--For purposes of paragraph 
 (1), the term `applicable percentage' means--
 ``(A) 4 percent in the case of a small employer, 
 and
 ``(B) 8.4 percent in the case of any other 
 employer.
 ``(3) Small employer.--
 ``(A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph (2), 
 the term `small employer' means any employer if--
 ``(i) the average number of full-time 
 employees (or the equivalent) of such employer 
 during the preceding calendar year is less than 
 75, and
 ``(ii) the average annual wages (as defined 
 in section 3121(a)) paid by such employer to 
 such employees during such year is less than 
 $24,000.
 ``(B) Controlled groups.--All persons treated as a 
 single employer under subsection (a) or (b) of section 
 52 or subsection (m) or (o) of section 414 shall be 
 treated as 1 employer for purposes of subparagraph 
 (A).''
 (b) Self-Employment Income.--Section 1401 (relating to rate of tax 
on self-employment income) is amended by redesignating subsection (c) 
as subsection (d) and by inserting after subsection (b) the following 
new subsection:
 ``(c) Health Care.--
 ``(1) In general.--In addition to other taxes, there shall 
 be imposed for each taxable year, on the self-employment income 
 of every individual, a tax equal to the applicable percentage 
 (as defined in section 3111(c)) of the amount of the self-
 employment income for such taxable year.
 ``(2) Special rule for determining applicable percentage.--
 In determining the applicable percentage for purposes of 
 paragraph (1), section 3111(c) shall be applied by treating 
 such individual as an employee receiving wages equal to such 
 individual's self-employment income for the taxable year.''
 (c) Comparable Taxes for Railroad Services.--
 (1) Tax on employers.--Section 3221 is amended by 
 redesignating subsections (c), (d), and (e) as subsections (d), 
 (e), and (f), respectively, and by inserting after subsection 
 (b) the following new subsection:
 ``(c) Health Care.--In addition to other taxes, there is hereby 
imposed on every employer an excise tax, with respect to having 
individuals in his employ, equal to the applicable percentage (as 
defined in section 3111(c)) of the compensation paid by such employer 
for services rendered to such employer.''
 (2) Tax on employee representatives.--Subsection (a) of 
 section 3211 (relating to tax on employee representatives) is 
 amended by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (4) and by 
 inserting after paragraph (2) the following new paragraph:
 ``(3) Health care.--
 ``(A) In general.--In addition to other taxes, 
 there is hereby imposed on the income of each employee 
 representative a tax equal to the applicable percentage 
 of the compensation received during the calendar year 
 by such employee representative for services rendered 
 by such employee representative.
 ``(B) Special rule for determining applicable 
 percentage.--In determining the applicable percentage 
 for purposes of subparagraph (A), section 3111(c) shall 
 be applied by treated such individual as an employee 
 receiving wages equal to such individual's compensation 
 for the taxable year.''
 (3) No applicable base.--Subparagraph (A) of section 
 3231(e)(2) is amended by adding at the end thereof the 
 following new clause:
 ``(iv) Health care taxes.--Clause (i) shall 
 not apply to the taxes imposed by sections 
 3221(c) and 3211(a)(3).''
 (4) Technical amendments.--
 (A) Paragraph (4) of section 3211, as redesignated 
 by paragraph (2), is amended by striking ``and (2)'' 
 and inserting ``, (2), and (3)''.
 (B) Subsection (f) of section 3221, as redesignated 
 by paragraph (1), is amended by striking ``and (b)'' 
 and inserting ``, (b), and (c)''.
 (d) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to remuneration paid after December 31, 1996.

SEC. 812. HEALTH CARE INCOME TAX.

 (a) General Rule.--Subchapter A of chapter 1 (relating to 
determination of tax liability) is amended by adding at the end thereof 
the following new part:

 ``PART VIII--HEALTH CARE INCOME TAX ON INDIVIDUALS

 ``Sec. 59B. Health care income tax.

``SEC. 59B. HEALTH CARE INCOME TAX.

 ``(a) Imposition of Tax.--In the case of an individual, there is 
hereby imposed a tax (in addition to any other tax imposed by this 
subtitle) equal to 2.1 percent of the taxable income of the taxpayer 
for the taxable year.
 ``(b) No Credits Against Tax; No Effect on Minimum Tax.--The tax 
imposed by this section shall not be treated as a tax imposed by this 
chapter for purposes of determining--
 ``(1) the amount of any credit allowable under this 
 chapter, or
 ``(2) the amount of the minimum tax imposed by section 55.
 ``(c) Special Rules.--
 ``(1) Tax to be withheld, etc.--For purposes of this title, 
 the tax imposed by this section shall be treated as imposed by 
 section 1.
 ``(2) Reimbursement of tax by employer not includible in 
 gross income.--The gross income of an employee shall not 
 include any payment by his employer to reimburse the employee 
 for the tax paid by the employee under this section.
 ``(3) Other rules.--The rules of section 59A(d) shall apply 
 to the tax imposed by this section.''
 (b) Clerical Amendment.--The table of parts for subchapter A of 
chapter 1 is amended by adding at the end the following new item:

 ``Part VIII. Health care income tax on 
 individuals.''
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1996.

 Subtitle C--Increase in Excise Taxes on Tobacco Products

SEC. 821. INCREASE IN EXCISE TAXES ON TOBACCO PRODUCTS.

 (a) Cigarettes.--Subsection (b) of section 5701 is amended--
 (1) by striking ``$12 per thousand ($10 per thousand on 
 cigarettes removed during 1991 or 1992)'' in paragraph (1) and 
 inserting ``$100 per thousand'', and
 (2) by striking ``$25.20 per thousand ($21 per thousand on 
 cigarettes removed during 1991 or 1992)'' in paragraph (2) and 
 inserting ``$210 per thousand''.
 (b) Cigars.--Subsection (a) of section 5701 is amended--
 (1) by striking ``$1.125 cents per thousand (93.75 cents 
 per thousand on cigars removed during 1991 or 1992)'' in 
 paragraph (1) and inserting ``$9.38 per thousand'', and
 (2) by striking ``equal to'' and all that follows in 
 paragraph (2) and inserting ``equal to 106.25 percent of the 
 price for which sold but not more than $250 per thousand.''
 (c) Cigarette Papers.--Subsection (c) of section 5701 is amended by 
striking ``0.75 cent (0.625 cent on cigarette papers removed during 
1991 or 1992)'' and inserting ``6.25 cents''.
 (d) Cigarette Tubes.--Subsection (d) of section 5701 is amended by 
striking ``1.5 cents (1.25 cents on cigarette tubes removed during 1991 
or 1992)'' and inserting ``12.5 cents''.
 (e) Smokeless Tobacco.--Subsection (e) of section 5701 is amended--
 (1) by striking ``36 cents (30 cents on snuff removed 
 during 1991 or 1992)'' in paragraph (1) and inserting 
 ``$3.00'', and
 (2) by striking ``12 cents (10 cents on chewing tobacco 
 removed during 1991 or 1992)'' in paragraph (2) and inserting 
 ``$1.00''.
 (f) Pipe Tobacco.--Subsection (f) of section 5701 is amended by 
striking ``67.5 cents (56.25 cents on pipe tobacco removed during 1991 
or 1992)'' and inserting ``$5.63''.
 (g) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to articles removed (as defined in section 5702(k) of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986) after December 31, 1996.
 (h) Floor Stocks Taxes.--
 (1) Imposition of tax.--On tobacco products and cigarette 
 papers and tubes manufactured in or imported into the United 
 States which are removed before January 1, 1997, and held on 
 such date for sale by any person, there is hereby imposed a tax 
 in an amount equal to the excess of--
 (A) the tax which would be imposed under section 
 5701 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 on the 
 article if the article had been removed on such date, 
 over
 (B) the prior tax (if any) imposed under section 
 5701 or 7652 of such Code on such article.
 (2) Authority to exempt cigarettes held in vending 
 machines.--To the extent provided in regulations prescribed by 
 the Secretary, no tax shall be imposed by paragraph (1) on 
 cigarettes held for retail sale on January 1, 1997, by any 
 person in any vending machine. If the Secretary provides such a 
 benefit with respect to any person, the Secretary may reduce 
 the $500 amount in paragraph (3) with respect to such person.
 (3) Credit against tax.--Each person shall be allowed as a 
 credit against the taxes imposed by paragraph (1) an amount 
 equal to $500. Such credit shall not exceed the amount of taxes 
 imposed by paragraph (1) for which such person is liable.
 (4) Liability for tax and method of payment.--
 (A) Liability for tax.--A person holding any 
 article on January 1, 1997, to which any tax imposed by 
 paragraph (1) applies shall be liable for such tax.
 (B) Method of payment.--The tax imposed by 
 paragraph (1) shall be paid in such manner as the 
 Secretary shall prescribe by regulations.
 (C) Time for payment.--The tax imposed by paragraph 
 (1) shall be paid on or before July 31, 1997.
 (5) Articles in foreign trade zones.--Notwithstanding the 
 Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 998, 19 U.S.C. 81a) and any 
 other provision of law, any article which is located in a 
 foreign trade zone on January 1, 1997, shall be subject to the 
 tax imposed by paragraph (1) if--
 (A) internal revenue taxes have been determined, or 
 customs duties liquidated, with respect to such article 
 before such date pursuant to a request made under the 
 1st proviso of section 3(a) of such Act, or
 (B) such article is held on such date under the 
 supervision of a customs officer pursuant to the 2d 
 proviso of such section 3(a).
 (6) Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection--
 (A) In general.--Terms used in this subsection 
 which are also used in section 5702 of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 shall have the respective meanings 
 such terms have in such section.
 (B) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the 
 Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate.
 (7) Controlled groups.--Rules similar to the rules of 
 section 5061(e)(3) of such Code shall apply for purposes of 
 this subsection.
 (8) Other laws applicable.--All provisions of law, 
 including penalties, applicable with respect to the taxes 
 imposed by section 5701 of such Code shall, insofar as 
 applicable and not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
 subsection, apply to the floor stocks taxes imposed by 
 paragraph (1), to the same extent as if such taxes were imposed 
 by such section 5701. The Secretary may treat any person who 
 bore the ultimate burden of the tax imposed by paragraph (1) as 
 the person to whom a credit or refund under such provisions may 
 be allowed or made.

 Subtitle D--Increase in Taxes on Firearms and Ammunition

SEC. 831. INCREASE IN TAXES ON FIREARMS AND AMMUNITION.

 (a) Pistols and Revolvers.--The text of section 4181 (relating to 
imposition of tax on firearms) is amended to read as follows:
 ``There is hereby imposed upon the sale by the manufacturer, 
producer, or importer of any pistol, revolver, firearm, shell, or 
cartridge a tax equal to 50 percent of the price for which so sold.''
 (b) Additional Taxes Not Added To Wildlife Fund.--Section 3(a) of 
the Act of September 2, 1937 (16 U.S.C. 669b(a)), commonly referred to 
as the ``Pittman-Robertson Wildlife Restoration Act'', is amended by 
adding at the end the following new sentence: ``There shall not be 
covered into the fund the portion of the tax imposed by such section 
4181 that is attributable to any increase in amounts received in the 
Treasury under such section by reason of the amendment made by section 
831 of the American Health Security Act, as estimated by the 
Secretary.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect on January 1, 1997.
 (d) Floor Stocks Tax.--
 (1) Imposition of tax.--In the case of any taxable article 
 on which tax was imposed under section 4181 of the Internal 
 Revenue Code of 1986 before January 1, 1997, and which is held 
 by a dealer on such date, there is hereby imposed a floor 
 stocks tax equal to the excess of--
 (A) the tax which would be imposed by such section 
 if such article had been sold by the manufacturer, 
 producer, or importer on such date, over
 (B) the tax imposed by such section on such 
 article.
 (2) Liability for tax and method of payment.--
 (A) Liability for tax.--The dealer holding the 
 taxable article on January 1, 1997, to which the tax 
 imposed by paragraph (1) applies shall be liable for 
 such tax.
 (B) Method of payment.--The tax imposed by 
 paragraph (1) shall be paid in such manner as the 
 Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate shall 
 prescribe.
 (C) Time for payment.--The tax imposed by paragraph 
 (1) shall be paid on or before July 31, 1997.
 (3) Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection--
 (A) Taxable article.--The term `taxable article' 
 means any article subject to tax under section 4181 of 
 such Code, other than an article exempt from such tax 
 under section 4182 of such Code.
 (B) Held by a dealer.--The term `held by a dealer' 
 has the meaning given such term by section 6412 of such 
 Code.
 (4) Articles in foreign trade zones.--Notwithstanding the 
 Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 998, 19 U.S.C. 81a) and any 
 other provision of law, any article which is located in a 
 foreign trade zone on January 1, 1997, shall be subject to the 
 tax imposed by paragraph (1) if--
 (A) internal revenue taxes have been determined, or 
 customs duties liquidated, with respect to such article 
 before such date pursuant to a request made under the 
 1st proviso of section 3(a) of such Act, or
 (B) such article is held on such date under the 
 supervision of a customs officer pursuant to the 2d 
 proviso of such section 3(a).
 (5) Other laws applicable.--All provisions of law, 
 including penalties, applicable with respect to the taxes 
 imposed by section 4181 of such Code shall, insofar as 
 applicable and not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
 subsection, apply with respect to the floor stock taxes imposed 
 by paragraph (1) to the same extent as if such taxes were 
 imposed by such section 4181.

 TITLE IX--CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO THE EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT INCOME 
 SECURITY ACT OF 1974

SEC. 901. ERISA INAPPLICABLE TO HEALTH COVERAGE ARRANGEMENTS UNDER 
 STATE HEALTH SECURITY PROGRAMS.

 Section 4 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 
(29 U.S.C. 1003) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``subsection (b)'' and 
 inserting ``subsections (b) and (c)''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 ``(c) The provisions of this title shall not apply to any 
arrangement forming a part of a State health security program 
established pursuant to section 101(b) of the American Health Security 
Act of 1994.''.

SEC. 902. EXEMPTION OF STATE HEALTH SECURITY PROGRAMS FROM ERISA 
 PREEMPTION.

 Section 514(b) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 
1974 (29 U.S.C. 1144(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following 
new paragraph:
 ``(9) Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to State 
health security programs established pursuant to section 101(b) of the 
American Health Security Act of 1994.''.

SEC. 903. PROHIBITION OF EMPLOYEE BENEFITS DUPLICATIVE OF BENEFITS 
 UNDER STATE HEALTH SECURITY PROGRAMS.

 Part 5 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new 
section:

``prohibition of employee benefits duplicative of state health security 
 program benefits

 ``Sec. 516. No employee benefit plan may provide benefits which 
duplicate payment for any items or services for which payment may be 
made under a State health security program established pursuant to 
section 101(b) of the American Health Security Act of 1994.''.

SEC. 903. REPEAL OF CONTINUATION COVERAGE REQUIREMENTS UNDER ERISA AND 
 CERTAIN OTHER REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO GROUP HEALTH 
 PLANS.

 (a) In General.--Part 6 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1161 et seq.) is 
repealed.
 (b) Conforming Amendments.--
 (1) Section 502(a)(7) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 1132(a)(7)) is 
 amended--
 (A) by striking paragraph (7); and
 (B) by redesignating paragraph (8) as paragraph 
 (7).
 (2) Section 502(c)(1) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 1132(c)(1)) is 
 amended by striking ``paragraph (1) or (4) of section 606 or''.
 (3) Section 4301(c)(4) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation 
 Act of 1993 (Public Law 103-66; 107 Stat. 377) and the 
 amendments made thereby are repealed.
 (4) The table of contents in section 1 of the Employee 
 Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 is amended by striking 
 the items relating to part 6 of subtitle B of title I of such 
 Act.

SEC. 904. EFFECTIVE DATE OF TITLE.

 The amendments made by this title shall take effect January 1, 
1996.

 <all>

HR 3960 IH----2
HR 3960 IH----3
HR 3960 IH----4
HR 3960 IH----5
HR 3960 IH----6
HR 3960 IH----7
HR 3960 IH----8
HR 3960 IH----9
HR 3960 IH----10
HR 3960 IH----11
HR 3960 IH----12