[Congressional Bills 117th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 2391 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

<DOC>

117th CONGRESS
 1st Session
 S. 2391

 To provide for clarification and limitations with respect to the 
 exercise of national security powers, and for other purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 July 20, 2021

 Mr. Murphy (for himself, Mr. Lee, and Mr. Sanders) introduced the 
 following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on 
 Foreign Relations

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To provide for clarification and limitations with respect to the 
 exercise of national security powers, and for other purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``National Security 
Powers Act of 2021''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
 TITLE I--WAR POWERS REFORM

Sec. 101. Definitions.
Sec. 102. Policy.
Sec. 103. Sunset of existing authorizations for the use of military 
 force.
Sec. 104. Repeal of the War Powers Resolution.
Sec. 105. Notification.
Sec. 106. Requirement for authorization.
Sec. 107. Expedited procedures for congressional action.
Sec. 108. Termination of funding.
Sec. 109. Interpretation of statutory authority requirement.
Sec. 110. Separability clause.
 TITLE II--ARMS EXPORT CONTROL

Sec. 201. Short title.
Sec. 202. Purpose.
Sec. 203. Congressional authorization of arms sales.
Sec. 204. Procedures for consideration of joint resolution authorizing 
 or prohibiting arms sales.
Sec. 205. Emergency procedures under Arms Export Control Act.
Sec. 206. Conforming amendments.
Sec. 207. Applicability.
 TITLE III--NATIONAL EMERGENCIES ACT REFORM

Sec. 301. Requirements relating to declaration and renewal of national 
 emergencies.
Sec. 302. Termination of national emergencies.
Sec. 303. Review by Congress of national emergencies.
Sec. 304. Reporting requirements.
Sec. 305. Conforming amendments.
Sec. 306. Applicability.

 TITLE I--WAR POWERS REFORM

SEC. 101. DEFINITIONS.

 In this title:
 (1) Country.--The term ``country'', when used in a 
 geographic sense, includes territories (whether or not 
 disputed) and possessions, territorial waters, and airspace.
 (2) Hostilities.--The term ``hostilities'' means any 
 situation involving any use of lethal or potentially lethal 
 force by or against United States forces (or, for purposes of 
 paragraph 4(B), by or against foreign regular or irregular 
 forces), irrespective of the domain, whether such force is 
 deployed remotely, or the intermittency thereof. The term does 
 not include activities undertaken pursuant to section 503 of 
 the National Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 5093) if such 
 action is intended to have exclusively non-lethal effects.
 (3) Hostilities report.--The term ``hostilities report'' 
 means a written report that sets forth the following 
 information:
 (A) The circumstances necessitating the 
 introduction of United States forces into hostilities 
 or a situation where there is a serious risk thereof, 
 or retaining them in a location where hostilities or 
 the serious risk thereof has developed.
 (B) The estimated cost of such operations.
 (C) The specific legislative and constitutional 
 authority for such action.
 (D) Any international law implications related to 
 such action if applicable.
 (E) The estimated scope and duration of the United 
 States forces' participation in hostilities, including 
 an accounting of the personnel and weapons to be 
 deployed.
 (F) The country or countries in which the 
 operations or deployment of United States forces are to 
 occur or are ongoing.
 (G) A description of their mission and the mission 
 objectives that would indicate the mission is complete.
 (H) Any foreign partner forces or multilateral 
 organizations that may be involved in the operations.
 (I) The name of the specific country (or countries) 
 or organized armed group (or groups) against which the 
 use of force is authorized.
 (J) The risk to United States forces or other 
 United States persons or property involved in the 
 operations.
 (K) Any other information as may be required to 
 fully inform Congress.
 (4) Introduce.--The term ``introduce'' means--
 (A) with respect to hostilities or a situation 
 where there is a serious risk of hostilities, any 
 commitment, engagement, or other involvement of United 
 States forces, whether or not constituting self-defense 
 measures by United States forces in response to an 
 attack or serious risk thereof in any foreign country 
 (including its airspace, cyberspace, or territorial 
 waters) or otherwise outside the United States and 
 whether or not United States forces are present or 
 operating remotely launched, piloted, or directed 
 attacks; or
 (B) the assigning or detailing of members of United 
 States forces to command, advise, assist, accompany, 
 coordinate, or provide logistical or material support 
 or training for any foreign regular or irregular 
 military forces if--
 (i) those foreign forces are involved in 
 hostilities; and
 (ii) such activities by United States 
 forces make the United States a party to a 
 conflict or are more likely than not to do so.
 (5) Serious risk of hostilities.--The term ``serious risk 
 of hostilities'' means any situation where it is more likely 
 than not that the United States forces will become engaged in 
 hostilities, irrespective of whether the primary purpose of the 
 mission is training or assistance.
 (6) Specific statutory authorization.--The term ``specific 
 statutory authorization'' means any joint resolution or bill 
 introduced after the date of the enactment of this Act and 
 enacted into law to authorize the use of military force that 
 includes, at a minimum, the following elements:
 (A) A clearly defined mission and operational 
 objectives and the identities of all individual 
 countries or organized armed groups against which 
 hostilities by the United States forces are authorized.
 (B) A requirement the President seek from the 
 Congress a subsequent specific statutory authorization 
 for any expansion of the mission to include new 
 operational objectives, additional countries, or 
 organized armed groups.
 (C) A termination of the authorization for such use 
 of United States forces within two years absent the 
 enactment of a subsequent specific statutory 
 authorization for such use of United States forces.
 (D) In cases where the use of military force in a 
 particular situation is being reauthorized, an estimate 
 and analysis prepared by the Congressional Budget 
 Office of costs to United States taxpayers to date of 
 operations conducted pursuant to the prior 
 authorization or authorizations for that situation, and 
 of prospective costs to United States taxpayers for 
 operations to be conducted pursuant to the proposed 
 authorization.
 (7) Substantially enlarge.--The term ``substantially 
 enlarge'' means, for any two-year period, an increase in the 
 number of United States forces that causes the total number of 
 forces in a foreign country to exceed the lowest number of 
 forces in that country during that period by 25 percent or 
 more, or any increase of 1,000 or more forces. Temporary duty 
 and rotational forces shall be included in the number of United 
 States forces for the purposes of this title.
 (8) Training.--When used with respect to any foreign 
 regular or irregular forces, the term ``training'' has the 
 meaning given the term ``military education and training'' in 
 section 644 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 U.S.C. 
 2403), but does not include training that is focused entirely 
 on observance of and respect for the law of armed conflict, 
 human rights and fundamental freedoms, the rule of law, and 
 civilian control of the military.
 (9) United states forces.--The term ``United States 
 forces'' means any individuals employed by, or under contract 
 to, or under the direction of, any department or agency of the 
 United States Government who are--
 (A) deployed military or paramilitary personnel; or
 (B) military or paramilitary personnel who use 
 lethal or potentially lethal force in the cyberspace 
 domain.

SEC. 102. POLICY.

 The constitutional authority of the President as Commander-in-Chief 
to introduce United States Armed Forces into hostilities or into 
situations where there is a serious risk of hostilities shall be 
exercised only pursuant to--
 (1) a declaration of war;
 (2) specific statutory authorization; or
 (3) when necessary to repel a sudden attack, or the 
 concrete, specific, and immediate threat of such a sudden 
 attack upon the United States, its territories, or possessions, 
 its armed forces, or other United States citizens overseas.

SEC. 103. SUNSET OF EXISTING AUTHORIZATIONS FOR THE USE OF MILITARY 
 FORCE.

 Effective 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the 
following laws are hereby repealed:
 (1) The Authorization for Use of Military Force Against 
 Iraq Resolution of 2002 (Public Law 107-243; 116 Stat. 1498; 50 
 U.S.C. 1541 note).
 (2) The Authorization for Use of Military Force (Public Law 
 107-40; 50 U.S.C. 1541 note).
 (3) The Authorization for Use of Military Force Against 
 Iraq (Public Law 102-1; 105 Stat. 3; 50 U.S.C. 1541 note).
 (4) The 1957 Authorization for Use of Military Force in the 
 Middle East (Public Law 87-5).

SEC. 104. REPEAL OF THE WAR POWERS RESOLUTION.

 The War Powers Resolution (Public Law 93-148; 50 U.S.C. 1541 et 
seq.) is hereby repealed.

SEC. 105. NOTIFICATION.

 The President shall notify Congress, in writing, within 48 hours 
after United States forces enter the territory, airspace, or waters of 
a foreign country--
 (1) while equipped for combat, except for deployments which 
 relate solely to transportation, supply, replacement, or 
 training of such United States forces; or
 (2) in numbers that substantially enlarge the number of 
 United States forces already located in a foreign nation.

SEC. 106. REQUIREMENT FOR AUTHORIZATION.

 (a) Prior Authorization for Certain Activities Relating to 
Hostilities.--Except as provided in subsection (b), before introducing 
United States forces into hostilities or a situation where there is a 
serious risk of hostilities, the President shall provide a hostilities 
report to Congress and obtain a specific statutory authorization for 
such introduction. The President shall provide continuing hostilities 
reports to Congress 30 days after the initial report and every 30 days 
thereafter, in accordance with subsection (d).
 (b) Authorization for Certain Activities Relating to Hostilities.--
In cases where the President introduces United States forces into 
hostilities or a situation where there is a serious risk of hostilities 
either because of the need to repel a sudden attack upon the United 
States, its territories or possessions, its armed forces, or other 
United States citizens overseas or because the concrete, specific, and 
immediate threat of such a sudden attack, and the time required to 
provide Congress with a briefing necessary to inform a vote to obtain 
prior authorization from Congress within 72 hours would prevent an 
effective defense against the attack or threat of immediate attack, the 
President shall--
 (1) within 48 hours of ordering the introduction of United 
 States forces into hostilities or a situation where there is a 
 serious risk of hostilities, inform Congress of the President's 
 decision, describe the action taken, the justification for 
 proceeding without prior authorization, and certifying either 
 that hostilities have concluded or that they are continuing; 
 and
 (2) not later than 7 calendar days after ordering the 
 introduction of United States forces into hostilities or a 
 situation where there is a serious risk of hostilities, submit 
 to Congress a hostilities report and request for specific 
 statutory authorization except in cases where a certification 
 is submitted to Congress that the President--
 (A) has withdrawn, removed, and otherwise ceased 
 the use of United States forces from the situation that 
 triggered this requirement; and
 (B) does not intend to reintroduce them.
 (c) Termination of Activities Related to Hostilities.--If Congress 
does not enact a specific statutory authorization for United States 
forces to engage in hostilities in response to a request in accordance 
with subsection (b) within 20 days after the introduction of United 
States forces into hostilities or a situation where there is a serious 
risk of hostilities, the President shall withdraw, remove, and 
otherwise cease the use of United States forces. This 20-day period 
shall be extended for not more than an additional 10 days if the 
President determines, certifies, and justifies to Congress in writing 
that unavoidable military necessity involving the safety of the forces 
requires the continued use of the forces for the sole purpose of 
bringing about their safe removal from hostilities.
 (d) Continuing Hostilities Reports.--If the President obtains 
specific statutory authorization, the President shall continue to 
provide hostilities reports to Congress on the United States' forces' 
engagement or possible engagement in hostilities whenever there is a 
material change in the information previously reported under this 
section and in no event less frequently than every 30 days from the 
delivery of the first hostilities report.
 (e) Form.--Any report submitted pursuant to subsection (a), (b), or 
(d) shall be submitted to Congress in unclassified form without any 
designation relating to dissemination control and may include a 
classified annex only to the extent required to protect the national 
security of the United States.
 (f) Transmittal.--Each report submitted pursuant to subsection (a), 
(b), or (d) shall be transmitted to each house of Congress on the same 
calendar day. The report shall be--
 (1) referred to--
 (A) the Committee on Foreign Relations, the 
 Committee on Armed Services, and the Select Committee 
 on Intelligence of the Senate; and
 (B) the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Committee 
 on Armed Services, and the Permanent Select Committee 
 on Intelligence of the House of Representatives; and
 (2) made available to any member of Congress upon request.

SEC. 107. EXPEDITED PROCEDURES FOR CONGRESSIONAL ACTION.

 (a) Consideration by Congress.--Any resolution of disapproval 
described in subsection (b) may be considered by Congress using the 
expedited procedures set forth in this section.
 (b) Resolution of Disapproval.--For purposes of this section, the 
term ``resolution'' means only a joint resolution of the two Houses of 
Congress--
 (1) the title of which is as follows: ``A joint resolution 
 disapproving of the use of the United States Armed Forces in 
 the prosecution of certain conflict.'';
 (2) which does not have a preamble; and
 (3) the sole matter after the resolving clause of which is 
 as follows: ``That Congress does not approve the use of 
 military force in the prosecution of _______'', with the blank 
 space being filled with a description of the conflict 
 concerned.
 (c) Referral.--A resolution described in subsection (b) introduced 
in the Senate shall be referred to the Committee on Foreign Relations 
of the Senate. A resolution described in subsection (b) that is 
introduced in the House of Representatives shall be referred to the 
Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives.
 (d) Discharge.--If the committee to which a resolution described in 
subsection (b) is referred has not reported such resolution (or an 
identical resolution) by the end of 10 calendar days beginning on the 
date of introduction, such committee shall be, at the end of such 
period, discharged from further consideration of such resolution, and 
such resolution shall be placed on the appropriate calendar of the 
House involved.
 (e) Consideration.--
 (1) In general.--On or after the third calendar day after 
 the date on which the committee to which such a resolution is 
 referred has reported, or has been discharged (under subsection 
 (d)) from further consideration of, such a resolution, it is in 
 order (even though a previous motion to the same effect has 
 been disagreed to) for any Member of the respective House to 
 move to proceed to the consideration of the resolution. All 
 points of order against the resolution (and against 
 consideration of the resolution) are waived. The motion is 
 highly privileged in the House of Representatives and is 
 privileged in the Senate and is not debatable. The motion is 
 not subject to amendment, or to a motion to postpone, or to a 
 motion to proceed to the consideration of other business. A 
 motion to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to 
 or disagreed to shall not be in order. If a motion to proceed 
 to the consideration of the resolution is agreed to, the 
 respective House shall immediately proceed to consideration of 
 the joint resolution without intervening motion, order, or 
 other business, and the resolution shall remain the unfinished 
 business of the respective House until disposed of.
 (2) Debate.--Debate on the resolution, and on all debatable 
 motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited 
 to not more than 10 hours, which shall be divided equally 
 between those favoring and those opposing the resolution. An 
 amendment to the resolution is not in order. A motion further 
 to limit debate is in order and not debatable. A motion to 
 postpone, or a motion to proceed to the consideration of other 
 business, or a motion to recommit the resolution is not in 
 order. A motion to reconsider the vote by which the resolution 
 is agreed to or disagreed to is not in order.
 (3) Vote on final passage.--Immediately following the 
 conclusion of the debate on the resolution and a single quorum 
 call at the conclusion of the debate if requested in accordance 
 with the rules of the appropriate House, the vote on final 
 passage of the resolution shall occur.
 (4) Appeals from decisions of chair.--Appeals from the 
 decisions of the Chair relating to the application of the rules 
 of the Senate or the House of Representatives, as the case may 
 be, to the procedure relating to a resolution shall be decided 
 without debate.
 (f) Consideration by Other House.--
 (1) In general.--If, before the passage by one House of a 
 resolution of that House described in subsection (b), that 
 House receives from the other House a resolution described in 
 subsection (b), then the following procedures shall apply:
 (A) The resolution of the other House shall not be 
 referred to a committee.
 (B)(i) The consideration as described in subsection 
 (e) in that House shall be the same as if no resolution 
 had been received from the other House; but
 (ii) The vote on final passage shall be on the 
 resolution of the other House.
 (2) Following disposition.--Upon disposition of the 
 resolution received from the other House, it shall no longer be 
 in order to consider the resolution that originated in the 
 receiving House.
 (g) Vetoes.--If the President vetoes a resolution, debate in the 
Senate of any veto message with respect to the resolution, including 
all debatable motions and appeals in connection with the resolution, 
shall be limited to 10 hours, which shall be divided equally between 
those favoring and those opposing the resolution.
 (h) Rules of the Senate and House of Representatives.--This section 
is enacted by Congress--
 (1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate 
 and the House of Representatives, respectively, and as such it 
 is deemed a part of the rules of each House, respectively, but 
 applicable only with respect to the procedure to be followed in 
 that House in the case of a resolution described in subsection 
 (b), and it supersedes other rules only to the extent that it 
 is inconsistent with such rules; and
 (2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of 
 either House to change the rules (so far as relating to the 
 procedure of that House) at any time, in the same manner, and 
 to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that 
 House.

SEC. 108. TERMINATION OF FUNDING.

 Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no funds appropriated 
or otherwise made available under any law may be obligated or expended 
for any activity by United States forces for which prior congressional 
authorization is required under this title but has not been obtained, 
or for which authorization is required under this title but has not 
been obtained by the deadline specified in section 106(c) or for which 
a resolution of disapproval in accordance with section 107(b) has been 
enacted into law.

SEC. 109. INTERPRETATION OF STATUTORY AUTHORITY REQUIREMENT.

 Statutory authority to introduce United States forces into 
hostilities or into situations where there is a serious risk of 
hostilities, or to retain them in a situation where hostilities or the 
serious risk thereof has developed, shall not be inferred--
 (1) from any provision of law, including any provision 
 contained in any appropriation Act, unless such provision 
 expressly authorizes such introduction or retention and states 
 that it is intended to constitute specific statutory 
 authorization within the meaning of this title; or
 (2) from any source of international legal obligation 
 binding on the United States, including any resolution of the 
 United Nations Security Council and any treaty ratified before, 
 on, or after the date of the enactment of this Act, unless such 
 treaty is implemented by legislation specifically authorizing 
 such introduction or retention and stating that it is intended 
 to constitute specific statutory authorization within the 
 meaning of this title.

SEC. 110. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE.

 If any provision of this title or the application thereof to any 
person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the resolution 
and the application of such provision to any other person or 
circumstance shall not be affected thereby.

 TITLE II--ARMS EXPORT CONTROL

SEC. 201. SHORT TITLE.

 This title may be cited as the ``Arms Export Reform Act of 2021''.

SEC. 202. PURPOSE.

 It is the purpose of this title to ensure the proper role of 
Congress in national security decisions pertaining to sales, exports, 
leases, and loans of defense articles, especially with respect to armed 
conflict and human rights.

SEC. 203. CONGRESSIONAL AUTHORIZATION OF ARMS SALES.

 (a) Certification Required.--
 (1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of 
 law, in the case of a covered letter of offer, a covered 
 application for a license, or a covered agreement, before such 
 a letter of offer or license is issued or before such an 
 agreement is entered into or renewed, the President shall 
 submit to Congress a certification described in paragraph (3).
 (2) Covered letters of offers, applications for licenses, 
 and agreements.--For purposes of this subsection:
 (A) A covered letter of offer is any letter of 
 offer to sell under the Arms Export Control Act (22 
 U.S.C. 2751 et seq.) any item described in subsection 
 (c).
 (B) A covered application for a license is any 
 application by a person (other than with regard to a 
 sale under section 21 or 22 of the Arms Export Control 
 Act (22 U.S.C. 2761, 2762)) for a license for the 
 export of any item described in subsection (c).
 (C) A covered agreement is any agreement involving 
 the lease under chapter 6 of the Arms Export Control 
 Act (22 U.S.C. 2796 et seq.), or the loan under chapter 
 2 of part II of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 
 U.S.C. 2311 et seq.), of any item described in 
 subsection (c) to any foreign country or international 
 organization for a period of one year or longer.
 (3) Certification described.--A certification described in 
 this paragraph is a numbered certification containing the 
 following:
 (A) In the case of a letter of offer to sell, the 
 information described in section 36(b)(1) of the Arms 
 Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2776(b)(1)) and section 
 36(b)(2) of such Act, as redesignated by section 206(a) 
 of this Act, without regard to the dollar amount of 
 such sale, except as specified in subsection (c).
 (B) In the case of a license for export (other than 
 with regard to a sale under section 21 or 22 of the 
 Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2761, 2762)), the 
 information described in section 36(c) of such Act (22 
 U.S.C. 2776(c)), as amended by section 206(b) of this 
 Act, without regard to the dollar amount of such 
 export, except as specified in subsection (c).
 (C) In the case of a lease or loan agreement, the 
 information described in section 62(a) of the Arms 
 Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2796a(a)), unless section 
 62(b) of such Act (22 U.S.C. 2796a(b)) applies, without 
 regard to the dollar amount of such lease or loan, 
 except as specified in subsection (c).
 (b) Congressional Authorization Required.--
 (1) Prior congressional authorization.--No letter of offer 
 may be issued under the Arms Export Control Act (22 U.S.C. 2751 
 et seq.) with respect to a proposed sale of any item described 
 in subsection (c) to any country or international organization 
 (other than a country or international organization described 
 in paragraph (2)), no license may be issued under such Act with 
 respect to a proposed export of any such item to any such 
 country or organization, and no lease may be made under chapter 
 6 of such Act (22 U.S.C. 2796 et seq.) and no loan may be made 
 under chapter 2 of part II of the Foreign Assistance Act of 
 1961 (22 U.S.C. 2311 et seq.) of any such item to any such 
 country or organization, unless there is enacted a joint 
 resolution or other provision of law authorizing such sale, 
 export, lease, or loan, as the case may be.
 (2) NATO and certain countries.--No letter of offer or 
 license described in paragraph (1) may be issued and no lease 
 or loan described in such paragraph may be made with respect to 
 a proposed sale, export, lease, or loan, as the case may be, of 
 any item described in subsection (c) to the North Atlantic 
 Treaty Organization (NATO), any member country of such 
 organization, Australia, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Israel, 
 New Zealand, or Taiwan, if, not later than 20 calendar days 
 after receiving the appropriate certification, a joint 
 resolution is enacted prohibiting the proposed sale, export, 
 lease, or loan, as the case may be.
 (c) Items Described.--The items described in this subsection are 
those items of types and classes as follows (including parts, 
components, and technical data):
 (1) Firearms and ammunition of $1,000,000 or more.
 (2) Air to ground munitions of $14,000,000 or more.
 (3) Tanks, armored vehicles, and related munitions of 
 $14,000,000 or more.
 (4) Fixed and rotary, manned or unmanned armed aircraft of 
 $14,000,000 or more.
 (5) Services or training to security services of 
 $14,000,000 or more.

SEC. 204. PROCEDURES FOR CONSIDERATION OF JOINT RESOLUTION AUTHORIZING 
 OR PROHIBITING ARMS SALES.

 (a) Consideration by Congress.--Any joint resolution under section 
203(b) shall be considered by Congress using the expedited procedures 
set forth in section 107(c)-(h).
 (b) Form of Joint Resolutions.--
 (1) Prior congressional authorization.--The joint 
 resolution required by section 203(b)(1) is a joint resolution 
 the text of which consists only of one or more sections, each 
 of which reads as follows: ``The proposed ___ to ___ described 
 in the certification submitted pursuant to section 203(a) of 
 the Arms Export Reform Act of 2021, which was received by 
 Congress on ___ (Transmittal number) is authorized.'', with the 
 appropriate activity, whether sale, export, lease, or loan, and 
 the appropriate country or international organization, date, 
 and transmittal number inserted.
 (2) NATO and certain countries.--The joint resolution 
 required by section 203(b)(2) is a joint resolution the text of 
 which consists of only one section, which reads as follows: 
 ``That the proposed ___ to ___ described in the certification 
 submitted pursuant to section 203(a) of the Arms Export Reform 
 Act of 2021, which was received by Congress on ___ (Transmittal 
 number) is not authorized.'', with the appropriate activity, 
 whether sale, export, lease, or loan, and the appropriate 
 country or international organization, date, and the 
 transmittal number inserted.

SEC. 205. EMERGENCY PROCEDURES UNDER ARMS EXPORT CONTROL ACT.

 Section 36 of the Arms Export Control Act is amended by adding at 
the end the following:
 ``(j) Restriction on Emergency Authority Relating to Arms Sales 
Under This Act.--A determination of the President that an emergency 
exists requiring a proposed transfer of defense articles or defense 
services in the national security interests of the United States, thus 
waiving the congressional review requirements pursuant to section 3 --
 ``(1) shall apply only if--
 ``(A) the President submits a determination and 
 justification for each individual approval, letter of 
 offer, or license for the defense articles or defense 
 services that includes a specific and detailed 
 description of how such waiver of the congressional 
 review requirements directly responds to or addresses 
 the circumstances of the emergency cited in the 
 determination; and
 ``(B) the delivery of the defense articles or 
 defense services will take place not later than 60 days 
 after the date on which such determination is made, 
 unless otherwise authorized by Congress; and
 ``(2) shall not apply in the case of defense articles or 
 defense services that include manufacturing or co-production of 
 the articles or services outside the United States.''.

SEC. 206. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.

 (a) Government-to-Government Sales.--
 (1) In general.--Section 36(b) of the Arms Export Control 
 Act (22 U.S.C. 2776(b)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1)--
 (i) in the matter preceding subparagraph 
 (A), in the first sentence, by striking 
 ``Subject to paragraph (6)'' and inserting 
 ``Subject to paragraph (4)''; and
 (ii) in the flush text following 
 subparagraph (P), by striking the last 2 
 sentences;
 (B) by striking paragraphs (2) and (3);
 (C) by redesignating paragraphs (4), (5), and (6) 
 as paragraphs (2), (3), and (4), respectively;
 (D) in subparagraph (C) of paragraph (3), as so 
 redesignated, in the first sentence, by striking 
 ``Subject to paragraph (6)'' and inserting ``Subject to 
 paragraph (4)''; and
 (E) in paragraph (4), as redesignated by 
 subparagraph (C) of this paragraph, in the matter 
 preceding subparagraph (A), by striking ``in paragraph 
 (5)(C)'' and inserting ``in paragraph (3)(C)''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Section 38(f)(5)(B)(ii) of such 
 Act (22 U.S.C. 2778(f)(5)(B)(ii)) is amended by striking 
 ``section 36(b)(5)(A)'' and inserting ``section 36(b)(3)(A)''.
 (b) Commercially Licensed Sales.--Section 36(c) of such Act (22 
U.S.C. 2776(c)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), in the first sentence, by striking 
 ``Subject to paragraph (5), in'' and inserting ``In'';
 (2) by striking paragraphs (2) through (5); and
 (3) by redesignating paragraph (6) as paragraph (2).
 (c) Legislative Review of Leases and Loans.--
 (1) Repeal.--Section 63 of such Act (22 U.S.C. 2796b) is 
 repealed.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Section 62(b) of such Act (22 
 U.S. 2976a(b)) is amended, in the first sentence, by striking 
 ``(and in the case'' and all that follows through ``of that 
 section)''.

SEC. 207. APPLICABILITY.

 This title and the amendments made by this title shall apply with 
respect to any letter of offer or license for export issued, or any 
lease or loan made, after the date of the enactment of this Act.

 TITLE III--NATIONAL EMERGENCIES ACT REFORM

SEC. 301. REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO DECLARATION AND RENEWAL OF NATIONAL 
 EMERGENCIES.

 Section 201 of the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1621) is 
amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 201. DECLARATIONS AND RENEWALS OF NATIONAL EMERGENCIES.

 ``(a) Authority To Declare National Emergencies.--With respect to 
Acts of Congress authorizing the exercise, during the period of a 
national emergency, of any special or extraordinary power, the 
President is authorized to declare such a national emergency by 
proclamation. Such proclamation shall immediately be transmitted to 
Congress and published in the Federal Register.
 ``(b) Specification of Provisions of Law To Be Exercised.--
 ``(1) In general.--No powers or authorities made available 
 by statute for use during the period of a national emergency 
 shall be exercised unless and until the President specifies the 
 provisions of law under which the President proposes that the 
 President or other officers will act in--
 ``(A) a proclamation declaring a national emergency 
 under subsection (a); or
 ``(B) one or more Executive orders relating to the 
 emergency published in the Federal Register and 
 transmitted to Congress.
 ``(2) Limitations.--The President may--
 ``(A) specify under paragraph (1) only provisions 
 of law that make available powers and authorities that 
 relate to the nature of the national emergency; and
 ``(B) exercise such powers and authorities only to 
 address the national emergency.
 ``(c) Temporary Effective Periods.--
 ``(1) In general.--A declaration of a national emergency 
 under subsection (a) may last for 30 days from the issuance of 
 the proclamation (not counting the day on which the 
 proclamation was issued) and shall terminate when that 30-day 
 period expires unless there is enacted into law a joint 
 resolution of approval under section 203 with respect to the 
 proclamation.
 ``(2) Exercise of powers and authorities.--Any power or 
 authority made available under a provision of law described in 
 subsection (a) and specified pursuant to subsection (b) may be 
 exercised for 30 days from the issuance of the proclamation or 
 Executive order (not counting the day on which such 
 proclamation or Executive order was issued). That power or 
 authority cannot be exercised once that 30-day period expires, 
 unless there is enacted into law a joint resolution of approval 
 under section 203 approving--
 ``(A) the proclamation of the national emergency or 
 the Executive order; and
 ``(B) the exercise of the power or authority 
 specified by the President in such proclamation or 
 Executive order.
 ``(3) Exception if congress is unable to convene.--If 
 Congress is physically unable to convene as a result of an 
 armed attack upon the United States or another national 
 emergency, the 30-day periods described in paragraphs (1) and 
 (2) shall begin on the first day Congress convenes for the 
 first time after the attack or other emergency.
 ``(d) Prohibition on Subsequent Actions if Emergencies Not 
Approved.--
 ``(1) Subsequent declarations.--If a joint resolution of 
 approval is not enacted under section 203 with respect to a 
 national emergency before the expiration of the 30-day period 
 described in subsection (c), or with respect to a national 
 emergency proposed to be renewed under subsection (e), the 
 President may not, during the remainder of the term of office 
 of that President, declare a subsequent national emergency 
 under subsection (a) with respect to the same circumstances.
 ``(2) Exercise of authorities.--If a joint resolution of 
 approval is not enacted under section 203 with respect to a 
 power or authority specified by the President in a proclamation 
 under subsection (a) or an Executive order under subsection 
 (b)(1)(B) with respect to a national emergency, the President 
 may not, during the remainder of the term of office of that 
 President, exercise that power or authority with respect to 
 that emergency.
 ``(e) Renewal of National Emergencies.--A national emergency 
declared by the President under subsection (a) or previously renewed 
under this subsection, and not already terminated pursuant to 
subsection (c) or section 202(a), shall terminate on a date that is not 
later than one year after the President transmitted to Congress the 
proclamation declaring the emergency under subsection (a) or Congress 
approved a previous renewal pursuant to this subsection, unless--
 ``(1) the President publishes in the Federal Register and 
 transmits to Congress an Executive order renewing the 
 emergency; and
 ``(2) there is enacted into law a joint resolution of 
 approval renewing the emergency pursuant to section 203 before 
 the termination of the emergency or previous renewal of the 
 emergency.
 ``(f) Effect of Future Laws.--No law enacted after the date of the 
enactment of this Act shall supersede this title unless it does so in 
specific terms, referring to this title, and declaring that the new law 
supersedes the provisions of this title.''.

SEC. 302. TERMINATION OF NATIONAL EMERGENCIES.

 Section 202 of the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1622) is 
amended to read as follows:

``SEC. 202. TERMINATION OF NATIONAL EMERGENCIES.

 ``(a) In General.--Any national emergency declared by the President 
under section 201(a) shall terminate on the earliest of--
 ``(1) the date provided for in section 201(c);
 ``(2) the date on which Congress, by statute, terminates 
 the emergency;
 ``(3) the date on which the President issues a proclamation 
 terminating the emergency; or
 ``(4) the date provided for in section 201(e).
 ``(b) 5-Year Limitation.--Under no circumstances may a national 
emergency declared by the President under section 201(a) continue on or 
after the date that is 5 years after the date on which the national 
emergency was first declared.
 ``(c) Effect of Termination.--
 ``(1) In general.--Effective on the date of the termination 
 of a national emergency under subsection (a) or (b)--
 ``(A) except as provided by paragraph (2), any 
 powers or authorities exercised by reason of the 
 emergency shall cease to be exercised;
 ``(B) any amounts reprogrammed or transferred under 
 any provision of law with respect to the emergency that 
 remain unobligated on that date shall be returned and 
 made available for the purpose for which such amounts 
 were appropriated; and
 ``(C) any contracts entered into under any 
 provision of law relating to the emergency shall be 
 terminated.
 ``(2) Savings provision.--The termination of a national 
 emergency shall not moot--
 ``(A) any legal action taken or pending legal 
 proceeding not finally concluded or determined on the 
 date of the termination under subsection (a) or (b); or
 ``(B) any legal action or legal proceeding based on 
 any act committed prior to that date.''.

SEC. 303. REVIEW BY CONGRESS OF NATIONAL EMERGENCIES.

 Title II of the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1621 et seq.) 
is amended by adding at the end the following:

``SEC. 203. REVIEW BY CONGRESS OF NATIONAL EMERGENCIES.

 ``(a) Joint Resolutions of Approval and of Termination.--
 ``(1) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(A) Joint resolution of approval.--The term 
 `joint resolution of approval' means a joint resolution 
 that contains only the following provisions after its 
 resolving clause:
 ``(i) A provision approving--
 ``(I) a proclamation of a national 
 emergency made under section 201(a);
 ``(II) an Executive order issued 
 under section 201(b)(1)(B); or
 ``(III) an Executive order issued 
 under section 201(e).
 ``(ii) A provision approving a list of all 
 or a portion of the provisions of law specified 
 by the President under section 201(b) in the 
 proclamation or Executive order that is the 
 subject of the joint resolution.
 ``(B) Joint resolution of termination.--The term 
 `joint resolution of termination' means a joint 
 resolution terminating--
 ``(i) a national emergency declared under 
 section 201(a); or
 ``(ii) the exercise of any powers or 
 authorities pursuant to that emergency.
 ``(2) Procedures for consideration of joint resolutions of 
 approval.--
 ``(A) Introduction.--After the President transmits 
 to Congress a proclamation declaring a national 
 emergency under section 201(a), or an Executive order 
 renewing an emergency under section 201(e) or 
 specifying emergency powers or authorities under 
 section 201(b)(1)(B), a joint resolution of approval or 
 a joint resolution of termination may be introduced in 
 either House of Congress by any member of that House.
 ``(B) Requests to convene congress during 
 recesses.--If, when the President transmits to Congress 
 a proclamation declaring a national emergency under 
 section 201(a), or an Executive order renewing an 
 emergency under section 201(e) or specifying emergency 
 powers or authorities under section 201(b)(1)(B), 
 Congress has adjourned sine die or has adjourned for 
 any period in excess of 3 calendar days, the Speaker of 
 the House of Representatives and the President pro 
 tempore of the Senate, if they deem it advisable (or if 
 petitioned by at least one-third of the membership of 
 their respective Houses) shall jointly request the 
 President to convene Congress in order that it may 
 consider the proclamation or Executive order and take 
 appropriate action pursuant to this section.
 ``(C) Committee referral.--A joint resolution of 
 approval or a joint resolution of termination shall be 
 referred in each House of Congress to the committee or 
 committees having jurisdiction over the emergency 
 authorities invoked pursuant to the national emergency 
 that is the subject of the joint resolution.
 ``(D) Consideration in senate.--In the Senate, the 
 following rules shall apply:
 ``(i) Reporting and discharge.--If the 
 committee to which a joint resolution of 
 approval or a joint resolution of termination 
 has been referred has not reported it at the 
 end of 10 calendar days after its introduction, 
 that committee shall be automatically 
 discharged from further consideration of the 
 resolution and it shall be placed on the 
 calendar.
 ``(ii) Proceeding to consideration.--
 Notwithstanding Rule XXII of the Standing Rules 
 of the Senate, when the committee to which a 
 joint resolution of approval or a joint 
 resolution of termination is referred has 
 reported the resolution, or when that committee 
 is discharged under clause (i) from further 
 consideration of the resolution, it is at any 
 time thereafter in order (even though a 
 previous motion to the same effect has been 
 disagreed to) for a motion to proceed to the 
 consideration of the joint resolution to be 
 made, and all points of order against the joint 
 resolution (and against consideration of the 
 joint resolution) are waived. The motion to 
 proceed is subject to 4 hours of debate divided 
 equally between those favoring and those 
 opposing the joint resolution of approval or 
 the joint resolution of termination. The motion 
 is not subject to amendment, or to a motion to 
 postpone, or to a motion to proceed to the 
 consideration of other business.
 ``(iii) Floor consideration.--A joint 
 resolution of approval or a joint resolution of 
 termination shall be subject to 10 hours of 
 debate, to be divided evenly between the 
 proponents and opponents of the resolution.
 ``(iv) Amendments.--
 ``(I) In general.--Except as 
 provided in subclause (II), no 
 amendments shall be in order with 
 respect to a joint resolution of 
 approval or a joint resolution of 
 termination.
 ``(II) Amendments to strike or add 
 specified provisions of law.--Subclause 
 (I) shall not apply with respect to any 
 amendment to a joint resolution of 
 approval to strike from or add to the 
 list required by paragraph (1)(A)(ii) a 
 provision or provisions of law 
 specified by the President under 
 section 201(b) in the proclamation or 
 Executive order.
 ``(v) Motion to reconsider final vote.--A 
 motion to reconsider a vote on final passage of 
 a joint resolution of approval or of a joint 
 resolution of termination shall not be in 
 order.
 ``(vi) Appeals.--Points of order, including 
 questions of relevancy, and appeals from the 
 decision of the Presiding Officer, shall be 
 decided without debate.
 ``(E) Consideration in house of representatives.--
 In the House of Representatives, if any committee to 
 which a joint resolution of approval or a joint 
 resolution of termination has been referred has not 
 reported it to the House at the end of 10 calendar days 
 after its introduction, such committee shall be 
 discharged from further consideration of the joint 
 resolution, and it shall be placed on the appropriate 
 calendar. On Thursdays it shall be in order at any time 
 for the Speaker to recognize a Member who favors 
 passage of a joint resolution that has appeared on the 
 calendar for at least 3 calendar days to call up that 
 joint resolution for immediate consideration in the 
 House without intervention of any point of order. When 
 so called up a joint resolution shall be considered as 
 read and shall be debatable for 1 hour equally divided 
 and controlled by the proponent and an opponent, and 
 the previous question shall be considered as ordered to 
 its passage without intervening motion. It shall not be 
 in order to reconsider the vote on passage. If a vote 
 on final passage of the joint resolution has not been 
 taken on or before the close of the tenth calendar day 
 after the resolution is reported by the committee or 
 committees to which it was referred, or after such 
 committee or committees have been discharged from 
 further consideration of the resolution, such vote 
 shall be taken on that day.
 ``(F) Receipt of resolution from other house.--If, 
 before passing a joint resolution of approval or a 
 joint resolution of termination, one House receives 
 from the other House a joint resolution of approval or 
 a joint resolution of termination--
 ``(i) the joint resolution of the other 
 House shall not be referred to a committee and 
 shall be deemed to have been discharged from 
 committee on the day it is received; and
 ``(ii) the procedures set forth in 
 subparagraph (D) or (E), as applicable, shall 
 apply in the receiving House to the joint 
 resolution received from the other House to the 
 same extent as such procedures apply to a joint 
 resolution of the receiving House.
 ``(G) Rule of construction.--The enactment of a 
 joint resolution of approval or of a joint resolution 
 of termination under this subsection shall not be 
 interpreted to serve as a grant or modification by 
 Congress of statutory authority for the emergency 
 powers of the President.
 ``(b) Rules of the House and the Senate.--Subsection (a) is enacted 
by Congress--
 ``(1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate 
 and the House of Representatives, respectively, and as such is 
 deemed a part of the rules of each House, respectively, but 
 applicable only with respect to the procedure to be followed in 
 the House in the case of joint resolutions of approval, and 
 supersede other rules only to the extent that it is 
 inconsistent with such other rules; and
 ``(2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of 
 either House to change the rules (so far as relating to the 
 procedure of that House) at any time, in the same manner, and 
 to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that 
 House.''.

SEC. 304. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.

 Section 401 of the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1641) is 
amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(d) Report on Emergencies.--The President shall transmit to 
Congress, with any proclamation declaring a national emergency under 
section 201(a), or Executive order renewing an emergency under section 
201(e) or specifying emergency powers or authorities under section 
201(b)(1)(B), a report, in writing, that includes the following:
 ``(1) A description of the circumstances necessitating the 
 declaration of a national emergency, the renewal of such an 
 emergency, or the use of a new emergency authority specified in 
 the Executive order, as the case may be.
 ``(2) The estimated duration of the national emergency.
 ``(3) A summary of the actions the President or other 
 officers intend to take, including any reprogramming or 
 transfer of funds, and the statutory authorities the President 
 and such officers expect to rely on in addressing the national 
 emergency.
 ``(4) In the case of a renewal of a national emergency, a 
 summary of the actions the President or other officers have 
 taken in the preceding one-year period, including any 
 reprogramming or transfer of funds, to address the emergency.
 ``(e) Provision of Information to Congress.--The President shall 
provide to Congress such other information as Congress may request in 
connection with any national emergency in effect under title II.
 ``(f) Periodic Reports on Status of Emergencies.--If the President 
declares a national emergency under section 201(a), the President 
shall, not less frequently than every 180 days for the duration of the 
emergency, report to Congress on the status of the emergency and the 
actions the President or other officers have taken and authorities the 
President and such officers have relied on in addressing the emergency.
 ``(g) Final Report on Activities During National Emergency.--Not 
later than 90 days after the termination under section 202 of a 
national emergency declared under section 201(a), the President shall 
transmit to Congress a final report describing--
 ``(1) the actions that the President or other officers took 
 to address the emergency; and
 ``(2) the powers and authorities the President and such 
 officers relied on to take such actions.
 ``(h) Public Disclosure.--Each report required by this section 
shall be transmitted in unclassified form and be made public at the 
same time the report is transmitted to Congress, although a classified 
annex may be provided to Congress, if necessary.''.

SEC. 305. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.

 (a) National Emergencies Act.--Title III of the National 
Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1631) is repealed.
 (b) International Emergency Economic Powers Act.--Section 207 of 
the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1706) is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (b), by striking ``if the national 
 emergency'' and all that follows through ``under this 
 section.'' and inserting the following: ``if--
 ``(1) the national emergency is terminated pursuant to 
 section 202(a)(2) of the National Emergencies Act; or
 ``(2) a joint resolution of approval is not enacted as 
 required by section 203 of that Act to approve--
 ``(A) the national emergency; or
 ``(B) the exercise of such authorities.''; and
 (2) in subsection (c)(1), by striking ``paragraphs (A), 
 (B), and (C) of section 202(a)'' and inserting ``section 
 202(c)(2)''.

SEC. 306. APPLICABILITY.

 (a) In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), this title 
and the amendments made by this title shall take effect on the date of 
the enactment of this Act.
 (b) Application to National Emergencies Previously Declared.--A 
national emergency declared under section 201 of the National 
Emergencies Act before the date of the enactment of this Act shall be 
unaffected by the amendments made by this Act, except that such an 
emergency shall terminate on the date that is not later than one year 
after such date of enactment unless the emergency is renewed under 
subsection (e) of such section 201, as amended by section 301 of this 
Act.
 <all>