[Congressional Bills 106th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 1977 Referral Instructions Senate (RIS)]

106th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 S. 1977

 To review, reform, and terminate unnecessary and inequitable Federal 
 subsidies.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 November 19, 1999

Mr. McCain (for himself, Mr. Thompson, Mr. Lieberman, and Mr. Abraham) 
introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred to the 
 Committee on Governmental Affairs

 February 2, 2000

 Ordered that when the Governmental Affairs Committee reports S. 1977, 
the bill then be sequentially referred to the Committee on Finance for 
a period of up to 45 session days and that if the bill is not reported 
 by the end of that period it then be discharged from the Committee on 
 Finance and placed back on the calendar

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

 To review, reform, and terminate unnecessary and inequitable Federal 
 subsidies.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Corporate Subsidy Reform Commission 
Act of 1999''.

SEC. 2. FINDINGS.

 The Congress finds that--
 (1) Federal subsidies, including tax advantages, which may 
 have been enacted with a valid purpose for specific industries 
 or industry segments can--
 (A) fall subject to abuse, causing unanticipated 
 and unjustified windfalls to some industries and 
 industry segments; or
 (B) become obsolete, anticompetitive, or no longer 
 in the public interest, making such subsidies 
 unnecessary or undesired;
 (2) it is unfair to force the United States taxpayer to 
 support unnecessary subsidies, including tax advantages, that 
 do not provide a substantial public benefit or serve the public 
 interest;
 (3) the Congress and the President have been unable to 
 evaluate methodically those Federal subsidies that are unfair 
 and unnecessary and require reform or elimination; and
 (4) a Commission to advise the President and Congress is 
 essential to a comprehensive review of such unfair corporate 
 subsidies and to the reform or elimination of such subsidies.

SEC. 3. PURPOSE.

 The purpose of this Act is to establish a fair and deliberative 
process that will result in the timely identification, review, and 
reform or elimination of unnecessary and inequitable subsidies, 
including tax advantages, provided by the Federal Government to 
entities or industries engaged in profitmaking enterprises.

SEC. 4. DEFINITION.

 In this Act, the term ``inequitable Federal subsidy'' means a 
payment, benefit, service, or tax advantage that--
 (1) is provided by the Federal Government to any 
 corporation, partnership, joint venture, association, or 
 business trust, not to include--
 (A) a nonprofit organization described under 
 section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
 that is exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of 
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; or
 (B) a State or local government or Indian Tribe or 
 Alaska Native village or regional or village 
 corporation as defined in or established pursuant to 
 the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 U.S.C. 1601 
 et seq.);
 (2) is provided without a reasonable expectation, 
 demonstrated with the use of reliable performance criteria, 
 that actions or activities undertaken or performed in return 
 for such payment, benefit, service, or tax advantage would 
 result in a return or benefit, quantifiable or nonquantifiable, 
 to the public at least as great as the payment, benefit, 
 service, or tax advantage;
 (3) provides an unfair competitive advantage or financial 
 windfall; and
 (4) shall not include a payment, benefit, service, or tax 
 advantage that--
 (A) is awarded for the purposes of research and 
 development that--
 (i) is in the broad public interest on the 
 basis of a peer reviewed or other open, 
 competitive, merit-based procedure;
 (ii) is for a purpose consistent with the 
 mission of the agency;
 (iii) supports competing technologies at 
 levels appropriate to their potential, as 
 determined by an appropriate priority setting 
 process; and
 (iv) the private sector cannot reasonably 
 be expected to undertake without Federal 
 support at a level or in a timeframe consistent 
 with the payment, benefit, service, or tax 
 advantage's potential to provide broad economic 
 or other public benefit;
 (B) primarily benefits public health, safety, the 
 environment, or education;
 (C) is necessary to comply with international trade 
 or treaty obligations;
 (D) is certified by the United States Trade 
 Representative as specifically intended and as 
 substantially needed to protect the foreign trade 
 interests of the United States; or
 (E) is for the purpose of procurement of property 
 or services by the United States Government.

SEC. 5. THE COMMISSION.

 (a) Establishment.--There is established an independent commission 
to be known as the ``Corporate Subsidy Reform Commission'' (hereafter 
in this Act, referred to as the ``Commission'').
 (b) Duties.--The Commission shall--
 (1) examine the programs and tax laws of the Federal 
 Government and identify programs and tax laws that provide 
 inequitable Federal subsidies;
 (2) review inequitable Federal subsidies; and
 (3) submit the report required under section 6(b) to the 
 President and the Congress.
 (c) Limitations.--
 (1) Creation of new programs or taxes.--This Act is not 
 intended to result in the creation of new programs or taxes, 
 and the Commission established in this section shall limit its 
 activities to reviewing existing programs or tax laws with the 
 goal of ensuring fairness and equity in the operation and 
 application of such programs and laws.
 (2) Elimination of agencies and departments.--The 
 Commission shall limit its recommendations to the termination 
 or reform of payments, benefits, services, or tax advantages, 
 rather than the termination of Federal agencies or departments.
 (d) Advisory Committee.--The Commission shall be considered an 
advisory committee within the meaning of the Federal Advisory Committee 
Act (5 U.S.C. App.).
 (e) Appointment.--
 (1) Members.--The Commissioners shall be appointed for the 
 life of the Commission and shall be composed of nine members of 
 whom--
 (A) 3 shall be appointed by the President of the 
 United States;
 (B) 2 shall be appointed by the Speaker of the 
 House of Representatives;
 (C) 1 shall be appointed by the minority Leader of 
 the House of Representatives;
 (D) 2 shall be appointed by the majority Leader of 
 the Senate; and
 (E) 1 shall be appointed by the minority Leader of 
 the Senate.
 (2) Consultation required.--The President, the Speaker of 
 the House of Representatives, the minority leader of the House 
 of Representatives, the majority leader of the Senate, and the 
 minority leader of the Senate shall consult among themselves 
 prior to the appointment of the members of the Commission in 
 order to achieve, to the maximum extent possible, fair and 
 equitable representation of various points of view with respect 
 to the matters to be studied by the Commission under subsection 
 (b).
 (3) Appointments.--During the period of January 1, 2001 
 through January 31, 2001, the President shall submit to the 
 Senate the names of 3 individuals for appointment to the 
 Commission.
 (4) Failure to appoint.--If the President does not submit 
 to Congress the names of 3 individuals for appointment to the 
 Commission on or before the date specified in paragraph (3), 
 the process established under this Act shall be terminated.
 (5) Chairman.--At the time the President nominates 
 individuals for appointment to the Commission the President 
 shall designate 1 such individual who shall serve as Chairman 
 of the Commission.
 (6) Background.--The members shall represent a broad array 
 of expertise covering, to the extent practical, all subject 
 matter, programs, and tax laws the Commission is likely to 
 review.
 (f) Terms.--Each member of the Commission including the Chairman 
shall serve until the termination of the Commission.
 (g) Meetings.--
 (1) Initial meeting.--Not later than April 1, 2001, the 
 Commission shall conduct its first meeting.
 (2) Open meetings.--Each meeting of the Commission shall be 
 open to the public. In cases where classified information, 
 trade secrets, or personnel matters are discussed, the Chairman 
 may close the meeting. All proceedings, information, and 
 deliberations of the Commission shall be available, upon 
 request, to the chairman and ranking member of the relevant 
 committees of Congress.
 (h) Vacancies.--A vacancy on the Commission shall be filled in the 
same manner as the original appointment.
 (i) Pay and Travel Expenses.--
 (1) Pay.--Notwithstanding section 7 of the Federal Advisory 
 Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App.), each Commissioner, other than 
 the Chairman, shall be paid at a rate equal to the daily 
 equivalent of the minimum annual rate of basic pay for level IV 
 of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United 
 States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which 
 the member is engaged in the actual performance of duties 
 vested in the Commission.
 (2) Chairman.--Notwithstanding section 7 of the Federal 
 Advisory Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App.), the Chairman shall be 
 paid for each day referred to in paragraph (1) at a rate equal 
 to the daily payment of the minimum annual rate of basic pay 
 payable for level III of the Executive Schedule under section 
 5314 of title 5, United States Code.
 (3) Travel expenses.--Members shall receive travel 
 expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in 
 accordance with section 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States 
 Code.
 (j) Director of Staff.--
 (1) Qualifications.--The Chairman shall appoint a Director 
 who has not served in any of the entities or industries that 
 the Commission intends to review during the 12 months preceding 
 the date of such appointment.
 (2) Pay.--Notwithstanding section 7 of the Federal Advisory 
 Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App.), the Director shall be paid at 
 the rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive 
 Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code.
 (3) Reports.--On administrative and personnel matters, the 
 Director shall submit periodic reports to the Chairman of the 
 Commission and the chairman and ranking member of the Committee 
 on Governmental Affairs of the Senate and the Committee on 
 Government Reform and Oversight of the House of the 
 Representatives.
 (k) Staff.--
 (1) Additional personnel.--Subject to paragraphs (2) and 
 (4), the Director, with the approval of the Commission, may 
 appoint and fix the pay of additional personnel.
 (2) Appointments.--The Director may make such appointments 
 without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States 
 Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and 
 any personnel so appointed may be paid without regard to the 
 provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of 
 that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay 
 rates.
 (3) Detailees.--Upon the request of the Director, the head 
 of any Federal department or agency may detail any of the 
 personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to 
 assist the Commission in accordance with an agreement entered 
 into with the Commission.
 (4) Restrictions on personnel and detailees.--The following 
 restrictions shall apply to personnel and detailees of the 
 Commission:
 (A) Personnel.--Not more than one-third of the 
 personnel detailed to the Commission may be on detail 
 from Federal agencies that deal directly or indirectly 
 with the Federal subsidies the Commission intends to 
 review.
 (B) Analysts.--Not more than one-fifth of the 
 professional analysts of the Commission may be persons 
 detailed from a Federal agency that deals directly or 
 indirectly with the Federal subsidies the Commission 
 intends to review.
 (C) Lead analyst.--No person detailed from a 
 Federal agency to the Commission may be assigned as the 
 lead professional analyst with respect to an entity or 
 industry the Commission intends to review if the person 
 has been involved in regulatory or policymaking 
 decisions affecting any such entity or industry in the 
 12 months preceding such assignment.
 (D) Detailee.--A person may not be detailed from a 
 Federal agency to the Commission if, within 12 months 
 before the detail is to begin, that person participated 
 personally and substantially in any matter within that 
 particular agency concerning the preparation of 
 recommendations under this Act.
 (E) Federal officer or employee.--No member of a 
 Federal agency, and no officer or employee of a Federal 
 agency, may--
 (i) prepare any report concerning the 
 effectiveness, fitness, or efficiency of the 
 performance on the staff of the Commission of 
 any person detailed from a Federal agency to 
 that staff;
 (ii) review the preparation of such report; 
 or
 (iii) approve or disapprove such a report.
 (F) Limitation on staff size.--(i) Subject to 
 clause (ii), there may not be more than 25 persons 
 (including any detailees) on the staff at any time.
 (ii) The Commission may increase personnel in 
 excess of the limitation under clause (i), 15 days 
 after submitting notification of such increase to the 
 Committee on Governmental Affairs of the Senate and the 
 Committee on Government Reform and Oversight of the 
 House of Representatives.
 (G) Limitation on federal officer.--No member of a 
 Federal agency and no employee of a Federal agency may 
 serve as a Commissioner or as a paid member of the 
 staff.
 (5) Assistance.--
 (A) In general.--The Comptroller General of the 
 United States may provide assistance, including the 
 detailing of employees, to the Commission in accordance 
 with an agreement entered into with the Commission.
 (B) Consultation.--The Commission and the 
 Comptroller General of the United States shall consult 
 with the Committee on Governmental Affairs of the 
 Senate and the Committee on Government Reform and 
 Oversight of the House of Representatives on the 
 agreement referred to under subparagraph (A) before 
 entering into such agreement.
 (l) Other Authority.--
 (1) Experts and consultants.--The Commission may procure by 
 contract, to the extent funds are available, the temporary or 
 intermittent services of experts or consultants pursuant to 
 section 3109 of title 5, United States Code.
 (2) Leasing.--The Commission may lease space and acquire 
 personal property to the extent that funds are available.
 (m) Funding.--
 (1) Commission.--There are authorized to be appropriated to 
 the Commission such funds as are necessary to carry out its 
 duties under this Act.
 (2) Comptroller general.--There are authorized to be 
 appropriated to the Comptroller General of the United States 
 such funds as are necessary to carry out its duties under 
 subsection (k)(5) and section 6(b)(5).
 (n) Termination.--The Commission shall terminate on September 1, 
2002.

SEC. 6. PROCEDURE FOR MAKING RECOMMENDATIONS TO TERMINATE CORPORATE 
 SUBSIDIES.

 (a) Agency Plan.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than April 1, 2001, or the date 
 budget documents are submitted to Congress in 2001, whichever 
 is earlier, in support of the budget of each Federal department 
 or agency, the head of each department or agency shall include 
 in such documents a list identifying all programs or tax laws 
 within that department or agency that the head of the 
 department or agency determines provide inequitable Federal 
 subsidies.
 (2) Contents.--Such a list shall include--
 (A) a detailed description of each program or tax 
 law in question;
 (B) a statement detailing the extent to which a 
 payment, benefit, service, or tax advantage meets the 
 provisions of section 4;
 (C) a statement summarizing the legislative history 
 and purpose of such payment, benefit, service, or tax 
 advantage, and the laws or policies directly or 
 indirectly giving rise to the need for such programs or 
 tax laws; and
 (D) a recommendation to the Commission regarding 
 actions to be taken under section 5(b)(3).
 (3) International trade programs.--As part of its agency 
 plan submitted pursuant to this subsection, the United States 
 Trade Representative shall survey all federally supported 
 international trade programs in all Federal agencies and shall 
 certify to the Commission which of those programs meet the 
 requirements of section 4(4)(D). The Trade Representative shall 
 provide the Commission a detailed statement of the reasons each 
 program was or was not so certified as part of its agency plan.
 (b) Review and Recommendations by the Commission.--
 (1) Review and hearings.--At any time after the submission 
 of the budget documents to Congress, the Commission shall 
 conduct public hearings on the recommendations included in the 
 lists required under subsection (a). All testimony before the 
 Commission at a public hearing conducted under this paragraph 
 shall be presented under oath.
 (2) Report of commission.--
 (A) Report to president.--Not later than November 
 30, 2001, the Commission shall submit a report to the 
 President containing the Commission's findings and 
 recommendations for termination, modification, or 
 retention of each of the inequitable Federal subsidies 
 reviewed by the Commission. Such findings and 
 recommendations shall specify--
 (i) all actions, circumstances, and 
 considerations relating to or bearing upon the 
 recommendations; and
 (ii) to the maximum extent practicable, the 
 estimated effect of the recommendations upon 
 the policies, laws and programs directly or 
 indirectly affected by the recommendations.
 (B) Changes in recommendations.--Subject to the 
 deadline in subparagraph (A), in making its 
 recommendations, the Commission may make changes in any 
 of the recommendations made by a department or agency 
 if the Commission determines that such department or 
 agency deviated substantially from the provisions of 
 section 4.
 (C) Changes.--In the case of a change in the 
 recommendations made by a department or agency, the 
 Commission may make the change only if the Commission--
 (i) makes the determination required under 
 subparagraph (B); and
 (ii) conducts a public hearing on the 
 Commission's proposed changes.
 (D) Application.--Subparagraph (C) shall apply to a 
 change by the Commission in a department or agency 
 recommendation that would--
 (i) add or delete a payment, benefit, 
 service, or tax advantage to the list 
 recommended for termination;
 (ii) add or delete a payment, benefit, 
 service, or tax advantage to the list 
 recommended for modification; or
 (iii) increase or decrease the extent of a 
 recommendation to modify a payment, benefit, 
 service, or tax advantage included in a 
 department's or agency's recommendation.
 (3) Justification.--The Commission shall explain and 
 justify in the report submitted to the President under 
 paragraph (2) any recommendation made by the Commission that is 
 different from a recommendation made by an agency under 
 subsection (a).
 (4) Report to congress.--After November 30, 2001, or after 
 the date the Commission submits recommendations to the 
 President, the Commission shall, upon request, promptly provide 
 to any Member of Congress the information used by the 
 Commission in making its recommendations.
 (5) Comptroller general.--The Comptroller General of the 
 United States shall--
 (A) assist the Commission, to the extent requested, 
 in the Commission's review and analysis of the list, 
 statements, and recommendations made by departments and 
 agencies under subsection (a); and
 (B) not later than 60 days after April 1, 2001, or 
 the public release of the President's budget documents 
 in 2001, whichever is earlier, submit to the Congress 
 and to the Commission a report containing a detailed 
 analysis of the list, statements, and recommendations 
 of each department or agency.
 (c) Review by the President.--
 (1) In general.--Not later than December 31, 2001, the 
 President shall submit a report to the Commission and to the 
 Congress containing the President's approval or disapproval of 
 the Commission's recommendations submitted under subsection 
 (b).
 (2) Approval.--If the President approves all the 
 recommendations of the Commission, the President shall submit a 
 copy of such recommendations to the Congress, together with a 
 certification of such approval.
 (3) Disapproval.--If the President disapproves the 
 recommendations of the Commission in whole or in part, the 
 President shall submit to the Commission and the Congress the 
 reasons for that disapproval. Not later than February 1, 2002, 
 the Commission shall submit to the President a revised list of 
 recommendations.
 (4) Revision.--If the President approves all of the revised 
 recommendations of the Commission submitted to the President 
 under paragraph (3), the President shall submit a copy of such 
 revised recommendations to the Congress, together with a 
 certification of such approval.
 (5) Approval of entire package.--The President may only 
 submit an approval certificate that pertains to the entire 
 package of recommendations submitted by the Commission under 
 subsection (b)(2) or paragraph (3) of this subsection.
 (6) Failure to submit.--If the President does not submit to 
 the Congress an approval and certification described in 
 paragraph (2) or (4) by February 15, 2002, the process 
 established under this Act shall be terminated.

 SEC. 7. CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION.

 (a) Submission of Recommendations of the President.--If the 
President submits the Commission recommendations to the Congress under 
section 6(c) (2) or (4), such recommendations shall be accompanied by 
information specifying--
 (1) the reasons and justifications for the recommendations;
 (2) to the maximum extent practicable, the estimated 
 fiscal, economic, and budgetary impact of accepting the 
 recommendations;
 (3) the amount of the projected savings resulting from each 
 recommendation;
 (4) all actions, circumstances, and considerations relating 
 to or bearing upon the recommendations and to the maximum 
 extent practicable, the estimated effect of the recommendations 
 upon the policies, laws and programs directly or indirectly 
 affected by the recommendations; and
 (5) the specific changes in Federal statute necessary to 
 implement the recommendations.
 (b) Submission of Recommendations to the Senate and House of 
Representatives.--
 (1) Submission to congress.--The recommendations submitted 
 by the President to the Congress under subsection (a) shall be 
 submitted to the Senate and the House of Representatives on the 
 same day, and shall be delivered to the Secretary of the Senate 
 if the Senate is not in session, and to the Clerk of the House 
 of the Representatives if the House is not in session.
 (2) Federal register.--Any recommendations and accompanying 
 information submitted under subsection (a) shall be printed in 
 the first issue of the Federal Register after such submission.
 (c) Introduction.--
 (1) Date of introduction.--The Majority Leader of the 
 Senate or his designee, and the Speaker of the House of 
 Representatives, or his designee, shall introduce a bill (or 
 bills as provided under paragraph (2)) that implements the 
 recommendations submitted by the President under subsection 
 (a), not later than the later of 14 calendar days in session 
 after the date on which--
 (A) the Senate or the House of Representatives 
 received the recommendations submitted by the President 
 under subsection (a), if the Senate or the House of 
 Representatives (as applicable) is in session on the 
 date of such submission; or
 (B) the Senate or the House of Representatives is 
 first in session after such recommendations are 
 submitted, if the Senate or the House of 
 Representatives (as applicable) is not in session on 
 the date of such submission.
 (2) Multiple bills.--The majority leader of the Senate, or 
 his designee, or the Speaker of the House of Representatives, 
 or his designee, shall introduce a bill or separate bills 
 ensuring that all such recommendations will be implemented.
 (d) Committee Referral and Action.--
 (1) In general.--
 (A) Consideration and report.--Any committee to 
 which a bill or bills introduced under subsection (c) 
 is referred shall report such bill not later than 120 
 calendar days after the date of referral. No amendment 
 during committee consideration of a bill or bills 
 introduced under subsection (c) shall be in order 
 unless that amendment is confined to terminating or 
 reforming an inequitable Federal subsidy as defined in 
 section 4 of this Act. Any such reported bill shall be 
 referred to the Committee on Governmental Affairs of 
 the Senate or the Committee on Government Reform and 
 Oversight of the House of Representatives, as 
 applicable.
 (B) Committees on finance and ways and means.--
 (i) In general.--Any bill referred to the 
 Committee on Finance or the Committee on Ways 
 and Means that contains revenue increases may 
 be amended to include reductions in revenues in 
 the form of tax cuts in an amount up to the 
 amount of the revenue increases.
 (ii) Scorecard.--If the bill referred to in 
 clause (i) is enacted into law, any amount of 
 revenue reductions not made by the bill as 
 provided in clause (i) shall be credited to the 
 pay-as-you-go scorecard under section 252 of 
 the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit 
 Control Act of 1985 and may only be offset by 
 legislation reducing revenues.
 (2) Discharge.--If a committee does not report a bill 
 within the 120-day period as provided under paragraph (1), such 
 bill shall be discharged from the committee and referred to the 
 Committee on Governmental Affairs of the Senate or the 
 Committee on Government Reform and Oversight of the House of 
 Representatives, as applicable.
 (3) Report to floor; consolidation.--
 (A) In general.--Not later than the first day the 
 Senate or the House of Representatives (as applicable) 
 is in session following 10 calendar days in session 
 after the end of the 120-day period described under 
 paragraphs (1) and (2), the Committee on Governmental 
 Affairs of the Senate and the Committee on Government 
 Reform and Oversight of the House of Representatives, 
 as applicable, shall--
 (i) consolidate all bills referred under 
 paragraphs (1) and (2) into a single bill 
 (without substantive amendment) and report such 
 bill to the Senate or the House of 
 Representatives; or
 (ii) if only 1 bill is referred under 
 paragraph (1) or (2), report such bill (without 
 amendment) to the Senate or House of 
 Representatives.
 (B) Legislative calendar.--The bill reported under 
 subparagraph (A) shall be placed on the legislative 
 calendar of the appropriate House.
 (e) Procedure in Senate After Report of Committee; Debate; 
Amendments.--
 (1) Debate on bill.--Debate in the Senate on a bill 
 reported by the Committee on Governmental Affairs under 
 subsection (d)(3), and all amendments thereto and debatable 
 motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited 
 to not more than 30 hours. The time shall be equally divided 
 between, and controlled by, the Majority Leader and Minority 
 Leader or their designees.
 (2) Debate on amendments.--Debate in the Senate on any 
 amendment to the bill shall be limited to 1 hour, to be equally 
 divided between, and controlled by, the mover and the manager 
 of the bill, and debate on any amendment to an amendment, 
 debatable motion, or appeal shall be limited to 30 minutes, to 
 be equally divided between, and controlled by, the mover and 
 the manager of the bill, except that in the event the manager 
 of the bill is in favor of any such amendment, motion or 
 appeal, the time in opposition thereto shall be controlled by 
 the minority leader or his designee.
 (3) Limit of debate.--(A) A motion to further limit debate 
 is not debatable. A motion by the majority leader or his 
 designee to extend debate is not debatable. A motion to 
 recommit is not in order.
 (B)(i) No amendment to the bill reported by the Committee 
 on Governmental Affairs under subsection (d)(3) shall be in 
 order unless--
 (I) that amendment is confined to terminating or 
 reforming an inequitable Federal subsidy as defined by 
 section 4 of this Act; and
 (II) that amendment is germane to the bill reported 
 by the Committee on Governmental Affairs.
 (ii) For the purposes of a bill described under clause (i), 
 the term ``germane'' means only amendments which strike 
 language from such bill, or restore language in the bill or 
 bills introduced under subsection (c).
 (4) Conference reports.--
 (A) Motion to proceed.--A motion to proceed to the 
 consideration of the conference report on a bill 
 subject to the procedures of this section and reported 
 to the Senate may be made even though a previous motion 
 to the same effect has been disagreed to.
 (B) Time limitation.--The consideration in the 
 Senate of the conference report on the bill and any 
 amendments in disagreement thereto, including all 
 debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, 
 shall be limited to 5 hours, to be equally divided 
 between, and controlled by, the majority leader and 
 minority leader or their designees. Debate on any 
 debatable motion, appeal related to the conference 
 report, or any amendment to an amendment in 
 disagreement, shall be limited to 30 minutes, to be 
 equally divided between, and controlled by, the mover 
 and the manager of the conference report (or a message 
 between Houses).
 (f) Procedure in House of Representatives After Report of the 
Committee; Debate.--
 (1) Motion to consider.--When the Committee on Government 
 Reform and Oversight of the House of Representatives reports a 
 bill under subsection (d)(3) it is in order (at any time after 
 the fifth day (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal 
 holidays) following the day on which any committee report filed 
 on a bill referred under subsection (d)(1) to the Committee on 
 Government Reform and Oversight has been available to Members 
 of the House) to move to proceed to the consideration of the 
 bill reported to the House of Representatives. The motion is 
 highly privileged and is not debatable. An amendment to the 
 motion is not in order, and it is not in order to move to 
 reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or 
 disagreed to.
 (2) Debate.--General debate on the bill in the House of 
 Representatives shall be limited to not more than 10 hours, 
 which shall be divided equally between the majority and 
 minority parties. A motion further to limit debate is not 
 debatable. A motion to postpone debate is not in order, and it 
 is not in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the 
 bill is agreed to or disagreed to.
 (3) Terms of consideration.--Consideration of the bill by 
 the House of Representatives shall be in the Committee of the 
 Whole, and the bill shall be considered for amendment under the 
 5-minute rule in accordance with the applicable provisions of 
 rule XXIII of the Rules of the House of Representatives. After 
 the committee rises and reports the bill back to the House, the 
 previous question shall be considered as ordered on the bill 
 and any amendments thereto to final passage without intervening 
 motion.
 (4) Limit on debate.--Debate in the House of 
 Representatives on the conference report on a bill subject to 
 the procedures under this section and reported to the House of 
 Representatives shall be limited to not more than 5 hours, 
 which shall be divided equally between the majority and 
 minority parties. A motion further to limit debate is not 
 debatable. A motion to recommit the conference report is not in 
 order, and it is not in order to move to reconsider the vote by 
 which the conference report is agreed to or disagreed to. A 
 motion to postpone is not in order.
 (5) Appeals.--Appeals from decisions of the Chair relating 
 to the application of the Rules of the House of Representatives 
 to the procedure relating to the bill shall be decided without 
 debate.
 (g) Rules of the Senate and House of Representatives.--This section 
is enacted by Congress--
 (1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate 
 and the House of Representatives, respectively, but applicable 
 only with respect to the procedure to be followed in that House 
 in the case of a bill under this section, and it supersedes 
 other rules only to the extent that it is inconsistent with 
 such rules; and
 (2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of 
 either House to change the rules as far as relating to the 
 procedure of that House at any time, in the same manner, and to 
 the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that House.
 <all>