B37 5-9-89 (update)
S 932 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 932
To amend the Solid Waste Disposal Act so as to authorize the Environmental
Protection Agency to take certain action to protect the environment; to
mitigate water pollution; to reduce solid waste and the cost in connection
with the disposal of such waste through recycling; and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
May 9 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. HATFIELD (for himself and Mr. JEFFORDS) introduced the following bill;
which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
and Transportation
A BILL
To amend the Solid Waste Disposal Act so as to authorize the Environmental
Protection Agency to take certain action to protect the environment; to
mitigate water pollution; to reduce solid waste and the cost in connection
with the disposal of such waste through recycling; and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
 SECTION 1. Title II of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 3251 et
 seq.) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subtitle:
`Subtitle I--
`SHORT TITLE; FINDINGS AND PURPOSE
 `SEC. 12001. (a) SHORT TITLE- This subtitle may be cited as the `Beverage
 Container Reuse and Recycling Act'.
 `(b) FINDINGS AND PURPOSES- Congress finds and declares that--
 `(1) the failure to reuse empty beverage containers represents a significant
 and unnecessary waste of important national energy and material resources;
 `(2) solid waste resulting from such empty beverage containers constitutes
 a significant and rapidly growing proportion of municipal solid waste and
 increases the cost and problems of effectively managing the disposal of
 such waste;
 `(3) disposal of such solid waste, which imposes severe problems in both
 urban and rural aspects of our environment as well as a financial burden
 on local and State governments, could be carried out by a recycling of
 empty beverage containers;
 `(4) a uniform national system for requiring a refund value on the sale of
 all beverage containers would act as a positive incentive to individuals
 to clean up the environment and would result in a high level of reuse and
 recycling of such containers and help reduce the costs associated with
 solid waste;
 `(5) a national system for requiring a refund value on the sale of all
 beverage containers would result in significant energy conservation and
 resource recovery;
 `(6) the reuse and recycling of empty beverage containers would eliminate
 these unnecessary burdens on the Federal Government, local and State
 governments, and the environment;
 `(7) waste resulting from littering or discarding of certain containers
 constitutes a significant health hazard and poses a threat to children and
 others due to broken glass, detachable openings and other sharp objects
 present in recreation and other environments;
 `(8) several States have previously enacted and implemented State laws
 designed to protect the environment, conserve energy resources and natural
 resource recovery by requiring a refund value on the sale of all beverage
 containers, and these have proven effective as well as inexpensive to
 administer due to their self-enforcing nature;
 `(9) nonbiodegradable beverage containers represent a continued threat to
 the environment;
 `(10) a national system of beverage container recycling is consistent
 with the intent of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976
 (42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq.);
 `(11) the provisions of this subtitle are consistent with the goals set
 in January 1988, by the Environmental Protection Agency, which establish
 a national goal of 25 percent source reduction and recycling by 1992,
 coupled with a substantial slowing of the projected rate of increase in
 waste generation by the year 2000; and
 `(12) recycling the beverage containers of this Nation would result in a
 5 to 10 percent reduction in the solid waste stream of this Nation,
`DEFINITIONS
 `SEC. 12002. DEFINITIONS- For the purposes of this subtitle, the term--
 `(1) `Administrator' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection
 Agency;
 `(2) `beverage' means beer or other malt beverage, mineral water, soda
 water, a carbonated soft drink of any variety, or a drink in liquid form
 containing wine to which is added concentrated juice or flavoring material
 and containing not more than 7.5 percent alcohol by volume and intended
 for human consumption;
 `(3) `beverage container' means a container designed to contain a beverage;
 `(4) `refundable beverage container' means a beverage container which has
 clearly, prominently, and securely affixed to such container, or printed,
 embossed, or incised into such container, (in accordance with section 12003)
 a statement of the amount of the refund value of the container;
 `(5) `consumer' means a person who purchases a beverage in a beverage
 container for any use other than resale;
 `(6) `distributor' means a person who sells or offers for sale in commerce
 beverages in beverage containers for resale;
 `(7) `retailer' means a person who purchases from a distributor beverages
 in beverage containers for sale to a consumer or who sells or offers to
 sell in commerce beverages in beverage containers to a consumer. The
 Administrator shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to
 establish what person is a retailer with respect to the sale of beverages
 in beverage containers to consumers through beverage vending machines;
 `(8) `commerce' means trade, traffic, or transportation--
 `(A) between a place in a State and any place outside thereof,
 `(B) within the District of Columbia or any territory or possession of
 the United States, or
 `(C) which affects trade, traffic, commerce, or transportation described
 in subparagraph (A) or (B); and
 `(9) `State' includes the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto
 Rico, or any territory or possession of the United States.
`REQUIRED BEVERAGE CONTAINER LABELING
 `SEC. 12003. LABELING- No distributor or retailer may sell or offer
 for sale a beverage in a beverage container unless there is clearly,
 prominently and securely affixed to such container, or printed, embossed,
 or incised into such container (in accordance with regulations prescribed
 by the Administrator) a statement of the amount of the refund value of
 the container, such amount being not less than 5 cents.
`RETURN OF REFUND VALUE OF BEVERAGE CONTAINERS
 `SEC. 12004. (a) REFUND- If a consumer tenders for refund an empty and
 unbroken refundable beverage container to a retailer or distributor who
 sells (or has sold at any time during the period of three months ending
 on the date of such tender) a brand of beverage which was contained in
 the container, the retailer or distributor respectively shall promptly
 pay the consumer the amount of the refund value stated on the container.
 `(b) DISCLAIMER- Subject to the provisions of subsection (a), nothing in
 this subtitle shall be construed as prohibiting any retailer or distributor
 from establishing refundable beverage container redemption centers to
 assist in carrying out the purposes of this subtitle.
 `(c) REQUIREMENT TO REFUND- If a retailer or redemption center tenders for
 refund an empty and unbroken refundable beverage container to a distributor
 who sells (or has sold at any time during the period of three months ending
 on the date of such tender) a brand of beverage which was contained in the
 container, the distributor shall promptly pay the retailer the amount of
 the refund value stated on the container.
 `(d) STUDY- (1) The General Accounting Office shall conduct a study for the
 purpose of determining the feasibility and desirability of establishing
 a handler's fee to reflect the cost to the retailer or redemption center
 of handling returned beverage containers pursuant to this subtitle. The
 results of such study shall be made available to the Administrator within
 180 days following the date of the enactment into law of this subtitle.
 `(2) Within 180 days following the receipt by him of such report, the
 Administrator, after a public hearing and opportunity for public comment,
 shall determine whether or not a handler's fee should be paid to retailers
 and redemption centers for handling returned beverage containers pursuant
 to this subtitle. If the Administrator determines that such a fee should
 be paid, he shall determine the amount of such fee and the means by which
 moneys necessary to pay such fees will be generated.
 `(3) Any beverage container return laws of any State which is in effect on
 the date of enactment into law of this subtitle shall not be considered
 to be inconsistent with the provisions of section 12008(c) this subtitle
 solely by the manner in which such State law provides for a handler's fee
 or the administration thereof.
 `(e) REFUSE TO ACCEPT- A retailer, redemption center or distributor may
 refuse to accept any beverage container which does not have the refund
 value on such container in accordance with the requirements of section 9003.
 `(f) RULES AND REGULATIONS- The Administrator is authorized to promulgate
 rules and regulations establishing the right of (1) retailers to restrict the
 number of beverage containers redeemed, and (2) distributors to determine
 the form and condition in which beverage containers are to be returned to
 such distributor from the retailer or redemption center.
`RESTRICTIONS ON METAL BEVERAGE CONTAINERS WITH DETACHABLE OPENINGS
 `SEC. 12005. RESTRICTIONS- No distributor or retailer may sell or offer for
 sale a beverage in a metal beverage container a part of which is designed
 to be detached in order to open such container.
`PREEMPTION OF STATE AND LOCAL LAW
 `SEC. 12006. (a) PREEMPTION- Except as otherwise provided in this subtitle,
 no State or political subdivision thereof may establish or continue in
 effect any law respecting a refund value of beverage containers sold with a
 beverage to the extent the Administrator determines the law is inconsistent
 with this subtitle.
 `(b) REFUND VALUE- No State or political subdivision thereof may, for the
 purposes of determining the amount of any tax imposed by such State or
 subdivision on the sale of any refundable beverage container, take into
 account any amount charged which is attributable to the refund value of
 such container.
`PENALTIES
 `SEC. 12007. VIOLATIONS- Whoever violates any provision of section 12003,
 12004, or 12005, or regulation or rule issued pursuant thereto, shall be
 fined not more than $1,000 for each violation.
`EFFECTIVE DATES
 `SEC. 12008. (a) EFFECTIVE DATE- The provisions of sections 12003, 12004,
 and 12006 shall apply with respect to beverage containers sold or offered
 for sale in commerce on or after the expiration of the 2-year period
 following the date of the enactment of this subtitle.
 `(b) COMMERCE- The provisions of section 12005 shall apply with respect
 to beverages in beverage containers sold or offered for sale in commerce
 on or after the expiration of the one-year period following the date of
 the enactment of this subtitle.
 `(c) PREEMPTION- The provisions of section 12006(a) shall preempt State and
 local laws to the extent to which they are inconsistent with the provisions
 of this subtitle only on and after the effective date of such provisions.'.