HR 2858 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2858
To provide Federal funds for State professional medical liability programs
that comply with certain Federal standards, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
July 11, 1989
Mr. MRAZEK (for himself, Mr. PENNY, Mr. SKEEN, Mr. GUNDERSON, Mr. UPTON,
and Mr. HOCHBRUECKNER) introduced the following bill; which was referred
jointly to the Committees on the Judiciary and Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To provide Federal funds for State professional medical liability programs
that comply with certain Federal standards, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Professional Medical Liability Reform Act
 of 1989'.
SEC. 2. ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM TO ENCOURAGE STATES TO ESTABLISH MEDICAL
LIABILITY ARBITRATION PANELS.
 There is established in the Department of Justice a program to fund State
 medical liability programs that comply with the standards established in
 section 3.
SEC. 3. REQUIREMENTS FOR FEDERAL FUNDING FOR MEDICAL LIABILITY ARBITRATION
PANELS.
 (a) ESTABLISHMENT- To receive payments under section 5, a State shall
 establish one or more medical liability arbitration panels (in this Act
 referred to as `Panels') that comply with the requirements of subsections
 (b) through (o) not later than 4 years after the date of the enactment of
 this Act.
 (b) Membership and Appointment-
 (1) Membership-
 (A) IN GENERAL- A Panel shall have at least three members and may sit as
 a single body or in smaller units of at least three members. Each Panel
 shall include at least one licensed or certified health care professional,
 to be agreed upon by the plaintiff and the defendant, one person admitted to
 practice law in the State in which the Panel sits, and one person trained
 as a professional arbitrator, and may include such other members as the
 Attorney General of such State may provide.
 (B) HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS; SPECIALTY REPRESENTATION- In a case involving
 multiple defendants from multiple health care specialties, a representative
 from each defendant's health care specialty shall, wherever practicable,
 be appointed to the Panel hearing such case. Each such representative shall
 be agreed upon by the plaintiff, and the defendant of the appropriate health
 care specialty. Not more than three health care professionals shall serve
 on any Panel and such professionals shall cumulatively have only one vote.
 (2) APPOINTMENT- The Attorney General of each State shall appoint Panel
 members and a chairperson for each Panel in a manner that assures that the
 Panel will afford a full and fair hearing to any party or claim brought
 before it and that is consistent with the laws or constitution of such
 State. The members of a Panel shall be selected without regard to gender,
 race, religion, or national origin.
 (c) Jurisdiction-
 (1) ORIGINAL AND EXCLUSIVE JURISDICTION- Except for claims against the
 United States, a Panel shall have original and exclusive jurisdiction
 within the State in which it sits, to hear and decide claims alleging
 professional negligence.
 (2) IN THE EVENT OF MULTIPLE PANELS- If a State establishes more than one
 Panel, the jurisdiction of such Panels may be divided by geographic region
 within the State or by health care specialty.
 (d) CLAIM AND ANSWER- A claim alleging professional negligence shall
 be filed with a Panel in the State in which the negligence allegedly
 occurred in accordance with the regulations established by such State. Such
 regulations shall require that a copy of the claim and any accompanying
 documents be served on each defendant and that the defendant answer the
 claim in a timely fashion.
 (e) Powers-
 (1) HEARING- A Panel may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and
 places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence, as it considers
 appropriate.
 (2) OATHS- A Panel may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses
 appearing before it.
 (3) SUBPOENA POWER-
 (A) IN GENERAL- A Panel may issue subpoenas requiring the attendance and
 testimony of witnesses and the production of any evidence relevant to a claim
 before it. The attendance of witnesses and the production of such evidence
 may be required from any place within the State in which a Panel sits.
 (B) REFUSAL TO OBEY- If a person issued a subpoena under subparagraph
 (A) refuses to obey the subpoena or is guilty of contumacy, any court of
 the United States within the judicial district within which the Panel
 is sitting or within the judicial district within which such person is
 found or resides or transacts business may (upon application by the Panel)
 order such person to appear before the Panel to produce evidence or to give
 testimony relating to the matter under investigation. Any failure to obey
 such order of the court may be punished by the court as contempt thereof.
 (C) MANNER OF SERVICE- The subpoenas of a Panel shall be served in the manner
 provided for subpoenas issued by a United States district court under the
 Federal Rules of Civil Procedure for the United States district courts.
 (f) Rules Governing Panel Decision-
 (1) CLAIM DECIDED ACCORDING TO STATE LAW- Claims alleging professional
 negligence shall be decided according to the law (including the rules of
 evidence and procedure) of the State in which a Panel sits, subject to such
 special rules as the Attorney General of such State may promulgate. Any
 such special rule shall be published and readily available to the public.
 (2) TIME LIMIT- The Panel shall, wherever practicable, decide a claim within
 one year after the date on which the claim is filed. One continuance, not to
 exceed 90 days, may be granted to any party upon a showing that extraordinary
 circumstances and the interests of justice warrant the continuance.
 (3) Special rules-
 (A) COLLATERAL SOURCE RULE- Information regarding rights to payment from
 a source other than a named defendant for injuries sustained as the result
 of the alleged professional negligence with which such defendant is charged
 shall be allowed in evidence.
 (B) OFFSET RULE- Any amount awarded by a Panel to a plaintiff shall be
 offset by any amount received by such plaintiff from a collateral source
 described in subparagraph (A).
 (4) FRIVOLOUS CLAIMS- A Panel may dismiss any claim it determines to be
 frivolous and impose administrative costs (not to exceed $10,000) upon a
 plaintiff whose claim is dismissed under this paragraph.
 (g) Panel Decision-
 (1) DETERMINATION OF NEGLIGENCE- After hearing all the evidence presented
 by a plaintiff and each defendant, a Panel shall decide whether or not
 the plaintiff established professional negligence and, if so, whether the
 plaintiff's injury resulted from such negligence.
 (2) TRANSMISSION OF WRITTEN DECISION- Not later than 30 days after the
 conclusion of the hearing of the evidence (unless a delay is necessary due
 to extraordinary circumstances), a Panel shall transmit a written decision
 to the plaintiff and each of the defendants. The decision shall include
 a statement of the findings of fact and conclusions of law on which the
 Panel based its decision and the amount of damages, if any, awarded under
 subsection (h).
 (h) Award of Damages-
 (1) IN GENERAL- If a Panel finds that a defendant was professionally
 negligent, the Panel shall determine the amount of damages owed to
 the plaintiff by such defendant, and shall enter an order against such
 defendant to pay the plaintiff that amount. Except as provided in paragraph
 (3), an award by a Panel is due upon entry of such order, and a State may
 provide for judicial enforcement of an award that is not paid promptly. In
 any court proceeding to enforce an order to pay an award, the only issue
 shall be whether payment has been made according to the terms of the order.
 (2) NONECONOMIC LOSSES-
 (A) IN GENERAL- In any action for damages based on professional negligence,
 a plaintiff shall be entitled to recover noneconomic losses to compensate
 for pain suffering inconvenience, physical impairment, disfigurement and
 other nonpecuniary damage.
 (B) LIMIT- The amount of damages recovered for such noneconomic losses
 may not exceed $250,000.
 (C) COST-OF-LIVING- The amount described in subparagraph (B) shall be
 adjusted every 3 years to reflect changes in the cost-of-living index. The
 first such adjustment shall be made 3 years after the date of the enactment
 of this Act.
 (3) METHOD OF PAYMENT- Any award for continuing or prospective damages
 of $100,000 or more shall be made in annual or other periodic payments
 determined by the Panel to be appropriate. The timing and amount of such
 payments shall be such as to avoid hardship to, and assure full compensation
 of, each person to whom an award is made.
 (i) Judicial Review-
 (1) RIGHT TO APPEAL- A party to a claim decided by a Panel shall be entitled
 to appeal the decision of such Panel to the State court of appropriate
 jurisdiction (as determined under State law) if such party files a motion
 to appeal not later than 60 days after such decision is reported under
 subsection (j).
 (2) STANDARD OF REVIEW- A court reviewing a Panel decision under paragraph
 (1) shall uphold the decision unless it finds the decision to be clearly
 erroneous or in violation of the requirements of this section. In making
 such determinations, the court may consider the full written record of the
 Panel proceedings and the written decision of the Panel under subsection (g).
 (3) PROCEDURAL REVIEW- If a court finds that a Panel violated the
 requirements of this section, it shall remand the claim to the Panel with
 appropriate instructions.
 (4) CLEARLY ERRONEOUS DECISIONS- If a court finds a Panel decision to be
 clearly erroneous, the appellant shall be entitled to a trial de novo in
 the State court of appropriate jurisdiction (as determined under State law)
 and shall have the right to a trial by jury. Neither the written record of
 the Panel proceedings nor the written decision of the Panel under subsection
 (g) shall be admissible in such a trial.
 (j) Report of Panel Findings or Settlement Agreements-
 (1) NOTICE TO LICENSING OR CERTIFICATION BODY AND INSURANCE COMMISSIONER-
 (A) BY PANEL- A Panel shall transmit each report of a decision under
 subsection (g) or settlement agreement under section 4 to the appropriate
 State licensing or certification body and State insurance commissioner not
 later than 30 days after the Panel makes such finding or such settlement
 agreement is filed if--
 (i) a Panel, finds a defendant guilty of professional negligence; or
 (ii) a settlement agreement is entered into and filed with a Panel under
 section 4;
 (B) BY COURT- In the event of a trial under subsection (i)(4), a court
 shall transmit any findings of professional negligence or any settlement
 agreement to the appropriate State insurance commissioner and licensing or
 certification body not later than 30 days after such finding or settlement
 agreement.
 (2) DISCIPLINARY ACTION- A licensing or certification board receiving a
 report under paragraph (1) shall review such report and take appropriate
 disciplinary action, including probation, censure, or revocation or
 suspension of the health care professional's license.
 (3) CONTENTS OF REPORT- The report required by paragraph (1) shall include--
 (A) the written decision of the Panel under subsection (g) or the opinion
 of the court with respect to trial de novo under subsection (i)(4),
 as appropriate;
 (B) any order of award of the Panel or court with respect to the claim; or
 (C) a copy of any settlement agreement filed under section 4.
 (4) DUTIES OF LICENSING OR CERTIFICATION BOARDS AND INSURANCE COMMISSIONER-
 A licensing or certification board shall make each report received under
 paragraph (1) available for public inspection and the appropriate State
 insurance commissioner shall promptly notify each liability insurance
 provider within the State of--
 (A) the Panel or court's finding of negligence, including the name of each
 person found negligent, the nature of such negligence and the amount of
 any award; or
 (B) the terms of any settlement agreement under section (4).
 (5) ADJUSTMENT OF INSURANCE RATES- Each State shall authorize liability
 insurance providers to adjust their rates for persons who are found liable
 by a Panel or court for professional negligence, or who have entered into
 3 or more settlement agreements under section 4 that require a payment to
 a plaintiff within 3 years of the date on which any such person applies
 for liability insurance.
 (k) Attorney's Fees-
 (1) MAXIMUM AWARD- Payments of attorney's fees in professional negligence
 actions shall be in accordance with the following schedule:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 If the total award is: Attorney's fee is:
 Not over $100,000 33% of such amount
 $100,000 or more but less than $200,000 $33,000 plus 25% of the excess
 over $100,000
 $200,000 or more but less than $300,000 $58,000 plus 20% of the excess
 over $200,000
 $300,000 or more $78,000 plus 15% of the excess
 over 300,000.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 (2) Method of payment-
 (A) INSTALLMENT PAYMENTS- If a Panel orders payment of an award of damages
 in accordance with subsection (h)(3), payments of any contingent fee to
 the plaintiff's attorney shall be made in installments out of the periodic
 payments provided for in such subsection. No such installment payment may
 exceed the maximum installment payment amount.
 (B) MAXIMUM INSTALLMENT PAYMENT AMOUNT-
 (i) FORMULA- The maximum installment payment amount shall be determined
 by the following formula:
 [ Formula's typesetting may mislead! ]
 X=(A) x (B) / ((C))
 (ii) DEFINITIONS- As used in clause (i)--
 (I) X= the maximum installment payment amount of attorney's fees;
 (II) (A)= the total amount of attorney's fees;
 (III) (B)= the amount of periodic payment under subsection (h)(3); and
 (IV) (C)= the total amount of the damage award.
 (3) PENALTY- An attorney who violates the provisions of paragraph (1)
 or (2), shall forfeit three times the amount of any excess fee accepted,
 plus the costs incurred by the State in any civil action for recovery. The
 Federal district courts shall have original and exclusive jurisdiction
 over such actions for recovery.
 (4) DEFINITION OF AWARD- As used in this subsection, `award' means the total
 amount of damages to which a plaintiff is found to be entitled by a Panel.
 (l) STUDIES- Each State shall establish programs to--
 (1) identify the causes of professional negligence in such State and develop
 means to prevent or reduce the severity and frequency of avoidable injuries
 to health care recipients;
 (2) review the structure, authority, and operations of approved State
 medical liability claims plans, risk-management committees, health care
 professions licensing or certification bodies, and develop or implement
 needed improvements in such plans, committees, and bodies;
 (3) develop educational materials relating to--
 (A) standards for the safe practice of any licensed or certified health
 care profession within the State; and
 (B) the means by which injury to patients may be avoided and the standards
 of health care practice improved; and
 (C) educate the public about professional negligence;
 (m) DEVELOPMENT OF HEALTH CARE FACILITY RISK MANAGEMENT PROGRAMS- The
 health commissioner of each State shall develop a program to identify,
 investigate, and report on all incidents of professional negligence in
 health care facilities in such State and to encourage these facilities to
 take steps to prevent future negligence.
 (n) STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- A claim alleging professional negligence shall be filed not
 later than 3 years after the date on which the alleged negligence took place
 or 1 year after the plaintiff discovered the injury, whichever occurs later.
 (2) MINORS- A minor, alleging injury resulting from professional negligence
 that occurred before the minor's sixth birthday may file a claim for such
 negligence any time on or before their ninth birthday.
 (3) DEFINITION- As used in paragraph (2), the term `minor' shall have
 the meaning given such term by State law in the State in which an alleged
 injury occurred.
 (o) EXPERT WITNESSES- No expert witness may testify before a Panel unless
 such expert witness--
 (1) has been practicing or teaching in the area of expertise claimed by
 such witness within a 5-year period before the incident giving rise to
 the claim; and
 (2) fully discloses his or her qualifications to the Panel.
SEC. 4. SETTLEMENT.
 States are encouraged to permit parties to a claim filed with a Panel to
 enter into a settlement agreement at any time prior to the date on which
 a Panel transmits a decision under section 3(g) with respect to the claim
 or at any time prior to the decision of a court in a trial de novo under
 section 3(i)(4). A written copy of the agreement shall be filed with the
 Panel or court hearing such claim. Any such settlement may not provide for
 attorneys fees in excess of the amount authorized under section 3(k). Upon
 receiving a copy of the agreement, the Panel or court shall transmit the
 settlement agreement report to the State Insurance Commission as required
 under section 3(j)(1).
SEC. 5. PAYMENTS TO STATES.
 (a) ELIGIBILITY FOR PAYMENT- Any State that establishes a program in
 compliance with the requirements of section 3 shall be eligible for payments
 as provided by this section.
 (b) PAYMENT- The Attorney General shall make payments to States for
 programs under section 3 in two installments. The first such installment
 shall be for one-half of the amount specified in subsection (d) and shall
 be made to any State which submits an application demonstrating to the
 Attorney General's satisfaction that such State intends to establish a
 program which complies with the requirements of section 3. The second such
 payment shall be for one half of the amount specified in subsection (e)
 and shall be made to any State which obtains certification under section
 6 for such program. Payment shall be made to the State agent authorized
 by State law to receive such payment.
 (c) USE OF PAYMENTS- Payments made under subsection (a) shall first be used
 to establish, operate, and obtain certification for one or more liability
 arbitration Panels described under section 3.
 (d) REPORT OF GOVERNOR- Not later than 1 year after the date on which a State
 receives a payment under subsection (b), the Governor of such State shall
 report to the Attorney General on the use of such payment. Upon request,
 the Governor of any such State shall provide the Attorney General with an
 accounting of any funds received under such subsection.
 (e) AMOUNT OF PAYMENTS- The Attorney General shall allocate such sums to
 qualifying States as he determines to be appropriate based on the medical
 liability needs of each State. In making such determination, the Attorney
 General shall consider the need for States with a high incidence of claims
 alleging professional negligence to have a sufficient number of Panels to
 expeditiously process such claims.
 (f) TERMINATION OF ALLOCATION- If, within 30 months after the date of
 enactment of this Act, any State program has not become certified under
 section 6, the Attorney General shall notify the Governor of such State that
 it shall repay to the United States any funds paid to it under subsection
 (b) and be ineligible for further payments under this section unless such
 program is certified not later than 6 months after the date on which such
 notice is received.
 (g) In the Event of Noncompliance-
 (1) REPAYMENT OF FUNDS- If the Attorney General determines at any time
 that a State program certified under section 6 no longer complies with
 this Act, the Attorney General shall notify the Governor of such State of
 such determination and direct the State to repay to the United States any
 funds paid to it under subsection (a) which have not been spent by the
 date on which such State receives such notice. The State shall make such
 repayment not later than 60 days after receiving such notice.
 (2) REALLOCATION OF FUNDS- If, a State's allocation under subsection (e)
 is terminated under subsection (f), or if, under subsection (g), a State
 is required to repay to the United States any amount, the amount of such
 terminated allocation or repayment shall be reallocated by the Attorney
 General to the States that the Attorney General determines are most in
 need of additional funds to support activities eligible for payment under
 subsection (c).
SEC. 6. CERTIFICATION.
 (a) APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATION- Not later than 2 years after the date of
 the enactment of this Act, the Governor of any State that has established a
 program under section 3(a) shall apply to the Attorney General of the United
 States for certification of such program. To obtain certification, a State
 must demonstrate that the program is in compliance with the requirements
 of section 3. Such application shall contain copies of all State laws,
 rules, procedures, and regulations relevant to such program.
 (b) EVALUATION OF APPLICATION- The Attorney General shall review each
 application received under subsection (a) not later than 60 days after
 receiving such application, and shall certify the program described therein
 if the application demonstrates that the program is in substantial compliance
 with the requirements of section 3. If the Attorney General determines that a
 State program is not substantially in compliance with such section, he shall
 notify the Governor of such State not later than 15 days after making such
 determination, and recommend actions to bring the program into compliance.
SEC. 7. JUDICIAL REVIEW.
 Any decision by the Attorney General--
 (1) under section 6(b) that a State program is not in compliance with the
 requirements of section 3;
 (2) to terminate the allocation of a State under section 5(e);
 (3) to require a State to repay funds under section 5(f)(1); or
 (4) to reallocate funds under section 5(f)(2);
shall be final and not subject to judicial review.
SEC. 8. REGULATIONS.
 The Attorney General shall promulgate regulations for the interpretation
 and implementation of this Act. Not later than 1 year after the date
 of enactment of this Act, the Attorney General shall issue regulations
 governing the certification of State programs under section 6 and payments
 to States under section 5.
SEC. 9. DEFINITIONS.
 For purposes of this Act--
 (1) `professional negligence' means negligence in the provision of health
 care by a health care professional required to be licensed or certified
 by the State in which such professional practices;
 (2) `Panel' means a liability screening panel established under section
 3 or a subdivision of such panel authorized to hear liability claims in
 the same manner as a Panel; and
 (3) `State insurance commissioner' means the officer or agency of State
 government charged with licensing or regulating the business of providing
 insurance to health care providers within a State.
SEC. 10. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
 There is authorized to be appropriated not less than $100,000,000 for
 fiscal year 1990 and each succeeding fiscal year to carry out the purposes
 of this Act. Funds appropriated to carry out this Act in any fiscal year
 shall remain available until expended.