S 109 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 109
To amend the Mineral Lands Leasing Act of 1920 to authorize the Secretary of
the Interior to lease, in an expeditious and environmentally sound manner,
the public lands within the Coastal Plain of the North Slope of Alaska for
oil and gas exploration, development, and production.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
January 14 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1991
Mr. MURKOWSKI (for himself, Mr. STEVENS, Mr. HELMS, Mr. GARN, Mr. SYMMS,
and Mr. NICKLES) introduced the following bill; which was read twice and
referred to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
A BILL
To amend the Mineral Lands Leasing Act of 1920 to authorize the Secretary of
the Interior to lease, in an expeditious and environmentally sound manner,
the public lands within the Coastal Plain of the North Slope of Alaska for
oil and gas exploration, development, and production.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That this Act may be cited as the
 `Arctic Coastal Plain Public Lands Leasing Act of 1991'.
CONGRESSIONAL FINDINGS
 SEC. 2. As the basis for the declaration of policy and authorizations set
 forth in subsequent provisions of this Act, the Congress finds that--
 (a) the United States' domestic crude oil production is in substantial
 decline and dependence upon unreliable foreign sources of oil has grown
 to an excessive and unacceptable level;
 (b) the ability of the United States to compete effectively in an
 international economy is jeopardized by an excessive dependence on
 foreign oil;
 (c) excessive dependence on foreign oil threatens national security,
 imposes severe risks to the lives of United States service men and women,
 and creates unacceptable costs to the national defense;
 (d) production from the Prudhoe Bay oil fields on Alaska's North Slope,
 which now constitutes 24 per centum of the Nation's total domestic crude
 oil production, has begun to decline at approximately 10 per centum per year;
 (e) Without additional significant crude oil input to the Trans Alaska
 Pipeline System, pipeline shutdown will occur within ten years and will
 result in lost oil reserves of at least 1.0 billion barrels of crude oil;
 (f) in 1980, Congress directed the Secretary of the Interior to study
 the oil and gas potential and the fish and wildlife resources of the 1.5
 million acres of public land in the Coastal Plain;
 (g) reports prepared by the Department of the Interior and other Federal,
 State, and private groups clearly indicate that the lands within the Coastal
 Plain constitute the most outstanding onshore oil and gas prospect in the
 United States with potential reserves in place estimated to be from 4.8
 to 29.4 billion barrels of crude oil;
 (h) the results of twenty years of operations at Prudhoe Bay provide
 compelling evidence that carefully planned and executed oil and gas
 exploration, development, production, and transportation on the public
 lands is compatible with the North Slope's fish and wildlife resources
 and the needs of subsistence users of those resources; and
 (i) the long, ten or more years, lead time required for development of
 one or more major new North Slope oil fields requires a prompt decision
 by Congress on the future of the public lands within the Coastal Plain.
DECLARATION OF POLICY
 SEC. 3. (a) The Congress declares that it is in the national interest of
 the United States to:
 (1) permit exploration, development, production, and transportation of
 the oil and gas resources within the public lands of the Coastal Plain,
 which is--
 (A) located to the east of Prudhoe Bay, an area where intensive oil
 exploration, development and production has been conducted in an
 environmentally sound manner, and
 (B) served by an existing crude oil pipeline and tanker transportation
 system;
 (2) authorize an exploration and development program for the oil and gas
 resources of the public lands of the Coastal Plain which has the support
 of the State of Alaska, the North Slope Borough, the Village of Kaktovik,
 and other local governments in Alaska, and the Inupiat Eskimo people of
 the North Slope, and which will serve the vital interests of the Nation,
 including--
 (A) national security, by providing dependable new sources of domestic
 oil production outside of the control and influence of the Organization
 of Petroleum Exporting Countries or other countries subject to internal
 or regional political instabilities;
 (B) the interests of American consumers, by expanding domestic sources
 of reasonably priced gasoline, diesel, jet fuel, heating oil, and other
 crude oil products; and
 (C) the national economy, by improving the balance of trade through
 reductions in foreign oil imports, by generating new economic activity,
 by creating new jobs, and by reducing the Federal deficit through increased
 tax, competitive bonus bid and royalty revenues.
 (b) The Congress hereby declares that it is the policy of the United
 States that--
 (1) exploration, development, production, and transportation of the oil and
 gas resources of the public lands within the Coastal Plain, the Nation's
 foremost prospect for the discovery of new giant and super-giant oil fields,
 should be authorized and should proceed with dispatch; and
 (2) such activities should be conducted in a manner consistent with the
 protection of the fish and wildlife resources and environment and the
 needs of the area's subsistence users which utilize the public lands of
 the Coastal Plain.
COASTAL PLAIN
 SEC. 4. The Mineral Lands Leasing Act of 1920 (41 Stat. 437), as amended,
 is further amended by adding a new subchapter X at the end of chapter
 3A--Leases and Prospecting Permits (30 U.S.C. 181) to read as follows:
`SUBCHAPTER X--COASTAL PLAIN LEASING
`AUTHORIZATION FOR LEASING OF THE COASTAL PLAIN
 `SEC. 288. (a)(1) The Congress hereby authorizes and directs the Secretary of
 the Interior, through whatever agency of the Department he deems appropriate,
 to take such actions as are necessary to establish and promptly implement
 a competitive oil and gas leasing program that will assure the expeditious
 exploration, development, production, and transportation of the oil and
 gas resources of the public lands of the Coastal Plain.
 `(2) This authorization includes, incorporates, and supplements the
 provisions of the Mineral Leasing Act of 1920 and other existing Federal
 laws on oil and gas leasing, exploration, development, and transportation
 on public lands, and grants such new legislative authority as is necessary
 to enable the Secretary to authorize and permit all such activities
 as are required to achieve the expeditious exploration, development,
 production, and transportation of the oil and gas resources within the
 public lands of the Coastal Plain. These authorizations include all
 activities associated with and required in the exploration, development,
 production, and transportation of the oil and gas resources of the public
 lands within the Coastal Plain, and include, but are not limited to, the
 authorization and granting of rights-of-way, permits, leases, use permits
 and such other authorizations as are necessary to facilitate exploration,
 development, production and transportation of oil and gas resources on
 the public lands within the Coastal Plain.
 `(3) The Coastal Plain leasing program required by subsection (a) shall
 include the following elements:
 `(A) The first lease sale shall be conducted within twelve months of the
 date of enactment of this Act.
 `(B) The Secretary is authorized to grant to the highest responsible
 qualified bidder or bidders by competitive bidding, under regulations
 promulgated in advance, oil and gas leases on unleashed public lands within
 the Coastal Plain. Such regulations may provide for the deposit of cash bids
 in an interest-bearing account until the Secretary announces his decision on
 whether to accept the bids, with the interest earned thereon to be paid to
 the Treasury as to bids that are accepted and to the unsuccessful bidders
 as to bids that are rejected. The bidding shall be conducted as determined
 by the Secretary pursuant to bidding systems included in section 205(A)(1)
 (A) through (H) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act, as amended,
 of 1978 (43 U.S.C. 1331).
 `(C) An oil and gas lease issued pursuant to this Act for public lands
 within the Coastal Plain shall be for a lease tract consisting of a compact
 area and not exceeding more than two thousand five hundred and sixty acres,
 as the Secretary may in his discretion determine.
 `(D) Each lease shall be issued for an initial period of up to ten years
 and shall be extended for so long thereafter as oil and gas is produced
 in paying quantities from the lease or unit area to which the lease
 is committed or as drilling or reworking operations as approved by the
 Secretary are conducted thereon.
 `(E) In the conduct of competitive lease sales under the authority provided
 by this Act, the Secretary shall seek to maximize the revenue paid to the
 Treasury, but in doing so shall make reasonable efforts to conduct lease
 sales in a manner which will enable independent oil and gas producers,
 acting alone or in combination with other independent producers, to have
 a competitive opportunity to successfully bid on leases granted under the
 authority of this Act.
 `(4) This Act shall be considered the primary land management authorization
 for all activities associated with exploration, development, and production
 of oil and gas on public lands within the Coastal Plain. No land management
 review shall be required except as specifically authorized by this Act.
 `(5) Activities undertaken pursuant to this section shall include or provide
 for such conditions, restrictions, and prohibitions as the Secretary deems
 necessary or appropriate to mitigate reasonably foreseeable significant
 adverse effects on fish and wildlife and their habitat pursuant to subsection
 288(b) of this Act.
 `(6) The Secretary is authorized to permit, subject to reasonable rules
 and regulations, on public lands within the Coastal Plain all activities
 described in subsection 288(a) which are conducted by the owners of private
 lands within and/or adjacent to the public lands within the Coastal Plain.
 `(7) All receipts from sales, rentals, bonuses, and royalties on leases
 issued pursuant to this Act shall be deposited into the Treasury and
 allocated in accordance with applicable law.
`OTHER LEASING PROVISIONS AND CONSIDERATIONS
 `(b)(1) Prior to conducting a competitive oil and gas lease sale pursuant
 to section 288(a), the Secretary shall promulgate such stipulations, rules,
 and regulations as he determines are necessary and appropriate to ensure
 that oil and gas exploration, development, production, and transportation
 activities undertaken in the public lands within the Coastal Plain are
 conducted in a mannr to achieve the reasonable protection of the fish and
 wildlife resources, environment, and subsistence users which utilize the
 public lands within the Coastal Plain.
 `(2) The `Coastal Plain Resource Assessment' (April 1987) prepared by the
 Secretary pursuant to section 1002(h) of the Alaska National Interest
 Lands Conservation Act of 1980 (Public Law 96-487) and the legislative
 environmental impact statement incorporated into the Coastal Plain Resource
 Assessment pursuant to the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969
 (Public Law 91-190) shall satisfy all legal requirements under those laws
 with respect to any action taken to develop rules and regulations and
 procedures for a competitive oil and gas leasing program or to conduct
 particular lease sales on the public lands within the Coastal Plain. No
 further studies, reports, or assessments shall be required before the
 Secretary or other appropriate Federal officials may take such action.
 `(3) Nothing in this Act shall be construed to affect the applicability
 of the National Environmental Protection Act of 1969 to phases of oil and
 gas development, production, and transportation conducted subsequent to
 initial leasing and exploration. Consistent with the general authority of
 the Secretary as described in subsection 288(a) of this Act, all Federal
 and State environmental laws of general applicability to oil and gas
 operations and permitting shall continue to be applied.
`IMPACT AID
 `(c) The Secretary, after consulting with the Governor of Alaska and the
 North Slope Borough Assembly and Mayor, is authorized and directed to
 provide such impact aid, planning advice, and other appropriate assistance
 to communities on the North Slope and elsewhere in Alaska as is required
 to ensure the availability of public services needed to accommodate oil
 and gas exploration, development, production, and transportation on the
 public land within the Coastal Plain.
`DEFINITIONS
 `(d) For purposes of this Section--
 `(1) The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of the Interior; and
 `(2) The term `Coastal Plain' means those public lands identified in section
 1002(b)(1) of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act of 1980
 (Public Law 96-487).'.