S 3186 IS
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 3186
To amend the Public Health Service Act to prohibit physicians from referring
patients to health entities in which they have a financial relationship and
for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
August 12 (legislative day, AUGUST 5), 1992
Mr. ADAMS (for himself, Mr. BINGAMAN, and Mr. METZENBAUM) introduced the
following bill; which was read twice and referred to the Committee on Labor
and Human Resources
A BILL
To amend the Public Health Service Act to prohibit physicians from referring
patients to health entities in which they have a financial relationship and
for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Ethics in Referrals and Billing Act of 1992'.
SEC. 2. AMENDMENT TO PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Public Health Service Act is amended--
 (1) by redesignating title XXVII (42 U.S.C. 300cc et seq.) as title
 XXVIII; and
 (2) by inserting after title XXVI the following new title:
`TITLE XXVII--PHYSICIAN REFERRAL AND BILLING
`Subtitle A--Prohibition on Referrals
`SEC. 2701. PROHIBITION.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in section 2702, if a physician (or
 immediate family member of such physician) has a financial relationship
 with an entity--
 `(1) the physician may not make a referral to the entity for the furnishing
 of health or health-related items or services; and
 `(2) neither the entity nor the physician may present, or cause to be
 presented, to any person (including an individual, entity or third-party
 payor) a claim, bill or other demand for payment for health or health-related
 items or services furnished pursuant to a referral prohibited by this
 section.
 `(b) FINANCIAL RELATIONSHIP- For purposes of subsection (a), the term
 `financial relationship' means--
 `(1) except as provided in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of section 2702,
 an ownership or investment interest (whether through debt, equity or
 otherwise) in the entity; or
 `(2) except as provided in subsections (a) and (d) of section 2702,
 a compensation arrangement (as defined in section 2709(1)) between the
 physician (or immediate family member of the physician) and the entity.
`SEC. 2702. EXCEPTIONS TO FINANCIAL RELATIONSHIP PROVISIONS.
 `(a) OWNERSHIP AND COMPENSATION ARRANGEMENT PROHIBITIONS- Section 2701(a)
 shall not apply in the following cases:
 `(1) PHYSICIANS' SERVICES- In the case of physicians' services (as defined in
 section 2709(8)) provided or supervised personally by the referring physician
 or provided or supervised personally by another physician in the same
 group practice (as defined in paragraph 2709(4)) as the referring physician.
 `(2) IN-OFFICE ANCILLARY SERVICES- In the case of health or health-related
 items or services--
 `(A) that are furnished--
 `(i) personally by the referring physician;
 `(ii) personally by a physician who is a member of the same group practice
 as the referring physician; or
 `(iii) personally by individuals who are employed by such physician or
 group practice and who are personally supervised by the physician or by
 another physician in the group practice; and
 `(B) that are billed--
 `(i) by the physician performing or supervising the services;
 `(ii) by a group practice of which such physician is a member; or
 `(iii) by an entity that is wholly owned by such physician or such group
 practice, if the ownership or investment interest in such services meets
 such other requirements as the Secretary may by regulation impose as needed
 to protect against patient and payor abuse.
 `(3) PREPAID PLANS- In the case of services furnished by a public or private
 entity (which may be a health maintenance organization or a competitive
 medical plan organized under the laws of any State) that--
 `(A) is a health maintenance organization (as defined in section 1301); or
 `(B) complies with such other requirements as the Secretary may by
 regulation impose.
 `(4) OTHER RELATIONSHIPS- In the case of any other financial relationship
 that the Secretary determines, and specifies in regulations, does not pose
 a risk of payor or patient abuse.
 `(b) OWNERSHIP OR INVESTMENT PROHIBITION FOR OWNERSHIP OF PUBLICLY-TRADED
 SECURITIES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Ownership of investment securities (including shares or
 bonds, debentures, notes, or other debt instruments) that were purchased
 on terms equally available to the public and that are in a corporation that--
 `(A)(i) is listed for trading on--
 `(I) the New York Stock Exchange;
 `(II) the American Stock Exchange; or
 `(III) another exchange approved by the Secretary; or
 `(ii) is a national market system security traded under an automated
 interdealer quotation system operated by the National Association of
 Securities Dealers; and
 `(B) had, at the end of the corporation's most recent fiscal year,
 total assets exceeding $100,000,000, and stockholder equity in excess
 of $50,000,000;
shall not be considered to be an ownership or investment interest described
in section 2701(b)(1), except that any ownership or investment in an entity
providing any health or health-related item or service in which investments,
solicitations, or other inducements to invest are made exclusively or primarily
to physicians either prior to or in the course of a public offering would
be considered to be a financial relationship for purposes of this section.
 `(2) ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS- Paragraph (1) shall only apply in the case
 of a corporation that has not loaned funds to, or guaranteed a loan for,
 an investor who is in a position to make or influence referrals to, furnish
 items or services to, or otherwise generate business for the corporation
 if the investor used any part of such loan to obtain the investment interest.
 `(c) ADDITIONAL EXCEPTIONS RELATED TO OWNERSHIP OR INVESTMENT PROHIBITION-
 For purposes of section 2701(b)(1), a physician shall not be considered as
 having an ownership or investment interest in an entity in the following
 cases:
 `(1) HOSPITAL OWNERSHIP- In the case of health or health-related items or
 services provided by a hospital, if--
 `(A) the referring physician performs services at the hospital;
 `(B) the ownership or investment interest is in the hospital itself (and not
 merely in a subdivision thereof) subject to the requirements of subsection
 (b); and
 `(C) at least 60 percent of the hospital is owned by physicians performing
 services at the hospital.
 `(2) RURAL PROVIDERS- In the case of an entity that is furnishing health
 or health-related items or services, if--
 `(A) the entity is located in a rural area (as defined in section
 1886(d)(2)(D) of the Social Security Act);
 `(B) the referring physician maintains a practice in the same area; and
 `(C) the patient receiving the services is a resident of the same area;
except that, an entity described in subparagraph (A) may provide the requested
services in cases where the referring physician certifies that an actual
emergency exists.
 `(3) AMBULATORY SURGERY CENTERS- In the case of health or health-related
 items or services that are provided by an ambulatory surgical center, if
 such items or services are provided in connection with a surgical procedure
 performed by the referring physician or a member of the referring physician's
 group practice.
 `(d) EXCEPTIONS RELATING TO OTHER COMPENSATION ARRANGEMENTS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- For purposes of section 2701(b)(2), the following shall
 not be considered to be compensation arrangements.
 `(A) RENTAL OF OFFICE SPACE- Payments made by a lessee to a lessor for
 the use of premises if--
 `(i) the lease agreement is in writing and signed by the parties;
 `(ii) the lease specifies the premises covered by the lease;
 `(iii) in cases where the lease is intended to provide the lessee with
 access to the premises for periodic intervals of time, rather than on a
 full-time basis for the term of the lease, and the lease specifies exactly
 the schedule of such intervals, their precise length, and the exact rent
 for such intervals; and
 `(iv) the aggregate rental charge is set in advance, is consistent with
 fair market value in arms-length transactions and is not determined in
 a manner that takes into account the volume or value of any referrals or
 other business generated between the parties.
 `(B) RENTAL OF EQUIPMENT- Payments made by a lessee of equipment to the
 lessor of the equipment for the use of the equipment if--
 `(i) the lease agreement is in writing and signed by the parties;
 `(ii) the lease specifies the equipment covered by the lease;
 `(iii) in cases where the lease is intended to provide the lessee with
 use of the equipment for periodic intervals of time, rather than on a
 full-time basis for the term of the lease, the lease specifies exactly
 the schedule of such intervals, their precise length, and the exact rent
 for such interval; and
 `(iv) the aggregate rental charge set in advance and is consistent with
 fair market value in arms-length transactions.
 `(C) PAYMENTS FOR OTHER ITEMS OR SERVICES- Payments made by an entity to
 a physician who is not employed by the entity as compensation for--
 `(i) specified consultative services if--
 `(I) abnormal test results have been obtained that require additional
 interpretation or consultation; or
 `(II) such services are specifically requested by the referring physician
 on a specified patient, such services are furnished by a physician other
 than the referring physician (or by another physician who is a member of
 the same group practice) and where the consulting physician furnishes a
 written report for that patient;
 `(ii) the interpretation of tissue pathology or Pap smear slides or the
 provision of other cytology services;
 `(iii) employment-related health care services, including a payment by a
 self-insured employer for services rendered to employees or their families
 under the terms of a health insurance plan; and
 `(iv) any services required by local, State or Federal licensure,
 accreditation or other health and safety provisions:
except that the services described in this clause shall only be exempt for
purposes of section 2701(b)(2) if, (aa) the services are provided pursuant
to an agreement that is set out in writing; (bb) the agreement specifies the
services to be provided by the parties; (cc) in cases where the agreement is
intended to provide for the services on a periodic, sporadic or part-time
basis, rather than on a full-time basis for the term of the agreement,
the agreement specifies exactly the schedule of such intervals, their
precise length, and the exact charge for such intervals; (dd) the aggregate
compensation paid over the term of the agreement is consistent with fair
market value in arms-length transactions; and (ee) the services performed
under the agreement do not involve the counseling or promotion of a business
arrangement or other activity that violates any State or Federal law.
 `(D) EMPLOYMENT AND SERVICE ARRANGEMENTS WITH HOSPITALS- An arrangement
 between a hospital or nursing facility and a physician (or immediate
 family member) for the employment of the physician (or family member)
 or for the provision of administrative services by the physician, if--
 `(i) the arrangement is for identifiable services;
 `(ii) the amount of the remuneration under the arrangement--
 `(I) is consistent with the fair market value of the services provided; and
 `(II) is not determined in a manner that takes into account (directly or
 indirectly) the volume or value of any referrals by the referring physician;
 `(iii) the remuneration is provided pursuant to an agreement which would be
 commercially reasonable even if no referrals were made to the hospital; and
 `(iv) the arrangement meets such other requirements as the Secretary may
 impose by regulation as needed to protect against program or patient abuse.
 `(E) EMPLOYEES- Payments to an employee, who is an immediate family member
 of a physician, if the payments--
 `(i) are for bona fide employment services;
 `(ii) are generally consistent with the compensation paid to other employees
 for the same or similar services; and
 `(iii) do not constitute, directly or indirectly, payments or remuneration
 for referrals from the immediate family member.
 `(F) PHYSICIAN RECRUITMENT- Payments provided by a hospital to a physician
 to induce the physician to relocate to the geographic area served by the
 hospital in order to be a member of the medical staff of the hospital, if--
 `(i) the physician is not required to refer patients to the hospital;
 `(ii) the amount of the remuneration under the arrangement is not determined
 in a manner that takes into account (directly or indirectly) the volume
 or value of any referrals by the referring physician; and
 `(iii) the remuneration does not continue for more than 2 years.
 `(G) ISOLATED TRANSACTIONS- An isolated financial transaction (such as a
 one-time sale of property) if--
 `(i) the amount of the payment under the transaction--
 `(I) is consistent with the fair market value of the items or property
 sold; and
 `(II) is not determined in a manner that takes into account (directly
 or indirectly) the volume or value of any referrals by the referring
 physician; and
 `(ii) the remuneration is provided pursuant to an agreement that would be
 commercially reasonable even if no referrals were involved.
 `(H) SALARIED PHYSICIANS IN A GROUP PRACTICE- Payment by a group practice
 of the salary of a physician member of the group practice.
 `(I) PROVISION OF CERTAIN ITEMS, DEVICES, AND SUPPLIES- The provision of
 information, items, devices, or supplies by a laboratory to a physician
 that are incident to, or necessary for--
 `(i) the collection, transportation, or testing of specimens by the
 laboratory providing such information, items, devices or supplies; or
 `(ii) the communication of results by the laboratory providing such
 information, items, devices, or supplies.
 `(2) OTHER REQUIREMENTS- The Secretary may by regulation impose such other
 requirements as are needed to protect against patient and payor abuse.
`SEC. 2703. CLARIFICATION REGARDING CERTAIN REFERRALS.
 `(a) WHAT CONSTITUTES A REFERRAL- In the case of--
 `(1) a health or health-related item or service, the request by a physician
 for the health or health related item or service, including the request
 by a physician for a consultation with another physician, and any test or
 procedure ordered by, or to be performed by or under the supervision of
 that other physician shall constitute a referral by a referring physician;
 `(2) a request or establishment of a plan of care by a physician which
 includes the provision of the health or health related items or services,
 such request or establishment shall constitute a referral by a referring
 physician; and
 `(3) the prescription of the drug by a physician constitutes a referral
 by a referring physician, but only if the physician directs the patient
 to the specific pharmacy, home intravenous drug therapy provider or other
 entity dispensing the drug.
 `(b) NONREFERRALS- The following shall not constitute a referral by a
 referring physician:
 `(1) FURNISHING OF PROFESSIONAL SERVICES- A request by a physician for
 physician's services consisting solely of professional services to be
 furnished personally by that physician or under that physician's personal
 supervision.
 `(2) CLINICAL DIAGNOSTIC TESTS- A request by a pathologist for clinical
 diagnostic laboratory tests and pathological examination services, if such
 services are furnished by (or under the supervision of) such pathologist
 pursuant to a consultation requested by another physician.
 `(3) DIAGNOSTIC X-RAYS- Except as provided in subsection (a)(1), a request
 by a radiologist for diagnostic x-ray or imaging services, if such services
 are furnished by (or under the direct or personal supervision of) such
 radiologist pursuant to a consultation requested by another physician.
 `(4) RADIATION THERAPY- Except as provided in subsection (a)(1), a request
 by a physician specializing in the provision of radiation therapy services
 for such services, if such services are furnished by (or under the direct
 or personal supervision of) such physician specializing in the provision
 of radiation therapy services pursuant to a consultation requested by
 another physician.
 `(5) SPECIALIZED CANCER PHARMACY- A referral by a physician to a specialized
 cancer treatment pharmacy, if the pharmacy is engaged in the specific
 practice of preparing and distributing intravenous drugs and solutions
 used in the diagnosis and treatment of cancer and the complications thereof
 and is not engaged in distributing general pharmaceuticals to the public.
 `(6) RENAL DIALYSIS PROVIDER- A referral by a physician to a renal dialysis
 provider in conjunction with a renal dialysis procedure performed under
 the supervision of the physician.
`SEC. 2704. DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION.
 `Each claim, bill or other demand for health or health related items or
 services shall identify the referring physician by name and appropriate
 physician identification number, as determined by the Secretary pursuant
 to section 2705.
`SEC. 2705. REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
 `(a) OWNERSHIP ARRANGEMENT INFORMATION- Each entity providing health or
 health-related items or services shall make available to the Secretary,
 and to any payor (including a patient or third party payor), if requested
 by such payor, information concerning the entity's ownership arrangements,
 including--
 `(1) the covered items and services provided by the entity; and
 `(2) the names and Unique Physician Identification Numbers, or other
 appropriate identification number, of all physicians with an ownership or
 investment interest (as described in subsection 2701(b)(1)) in the entity,
 or whose immediate relatives have such an ownership or investment.
 `(b) FORM AND MANNER- The information required under subsection (a) shall
 be made available in such form, manner, and at such times as the Secretary
 shall require.
 `(c) CONSULTATIONS- The Secretary shall consult with all interested parties
 to determine how best to make the information required under subsection
 (a) available and establish appropriate procedures to carry out such
 determination.
 `(d) REPORT BY SECRETARY- Not later than the end of the first calendar
 quarter after the first full year during which this title is in effect,
 and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to the
 appropriate committees of Congress a report containing--
 `(1) summaries of the information submitted to the Secretary by entities
 under this title for the period for which the report is being submitted;
 `(2) the actions taken by the Secretary and other entities to remain in
 compliance with this title; and
 `(3) recommendations for legislation to improve this title if appropriate.
`SEC. 2706. REGULATIONS.
 `The Secretary shall promulgate such regulations as may be necessary to
 carry out the purposes of this title. If the Secretary determines that
 additional exceptions to the requirements of section 2701 are in the public
 interest, and will not result in patient or program abuse, the Secretary
 may by regulation prescribe additional exceptions.
`SEC. 2707. SANCTIONS.
 `(a) PAYMENT- No person (including an individual, entity or third party
 payor) shall be required to pay any claim, bill, or other demand for
 payment for health or health-related items or services furnished pursuant
 to a referral prohibited under section 2701.
 `(b) LIABILITY ON COLLECTION- If a person collects on any amounts that
 were billed in violation of section 2701, such person shall be liable to
 the payor for any amounts so collected.
 `(c) INSURANCE PROVISION WITH RESPECT TO NONPAYMENT- A policy of accident
 or health insurance issued by any third-party payor, including every
 subscriber contract issued by a hospital service corporation, health service
 corporation, medical expense indemnity corporation or mutual insurance
 company that provides coverage for health or health-related items or
 services shall include a provision prohibiting the payment of any claim,
 bill or other demand for payment for the provision of a health or health
 related item or service furnished pursuant to a referral prohibited under
 section 2701.
 `(d) PATTERNS OF CLAIMS- A third-party payor that is subject to subsection
 (c) shall report to the Secretary any pattern that may exist in the
 submission of claims, bills or other demands for payment that are submitted
 in violation of section 2701, not later than 60 days after that date on
 which such third-party payor has knowledge of such pattern.
 `(e) NO REQUIREMENT OF AUDIT- Notwithstanding the requirements of subsections
 (b), (c) and (d), a third-party payor providing reimbursements for health
 or health-related items or services shall not be required to audit or
 investigate any claim, bill or other demand for payment for such items or
 services that are furnished pursuant to a referral.
 `(f) KNOWLEDGE OF VIOLATION- Any person or entity that presents or causes
 to be presented, on a repeated basis, a bill or claim that such person or
 entity knows, or should have known, is for a service for which payment may
 not be made under subsection (a), and any physician that makes referrals, on
 a repeated basis, that are prohibited under section 2701, shall be subject
 to a civil money penalty of not more than $15,000 for each such service
 or referral. The provisions of section 1128A of the Social Security Act
 (other than the first sentence of subsection (a) and subsection (b)) shall
 apply to any civil money penalty assessed under the previous sentence in
 the same manner as such provisions apply to a penalty or proceeding under
 section 1128A(a).
 `(g) CONCERTED ACTION IN VIOLATION OF SUBTITLE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Any person or entity that enters into an arrangement or
 scheme (such as a cross-referral arrangement) that the person or entity
 knows, or should have known, has a principal purpose of assuring referrals
 by a physician to a particular entity which, if the physician directly
 made referrals to such entity, would be in violation of this section,
 shall be subject to a civil money penalty of not more than $100,000 for
 each such arrangement or scheme. The provisions of section 1128A of the
 Social Security Act (other than the first sentence of subsection (a)
 and subsection (b)) shall apply to a civil money penalty assessed under
 the previous sentence in the same manner as such provisions apply to a
 penalty or proceeding under section 1128A.
 `(2) OTHER CONCERTED ACTIONS- The Secretary may through regulations
 define such other arrangements whose purpose is to circumvent the purposes
 of this subtitle. A violation of such regulations shall be subject to a
 civil money penalty of not more than $100,000 for each such arrangement or
 scheme. The provisions of section 1128A of the Social Security Act (other
 than the first sentence of subsection (a) and subsection (b)) shall apply
 to a civil money penalty under the previous sentence in the same manner
 as such provisions apply to a penalty or proceeding under section 1l28A(a).
 `(h) SUSPENSION OF LABORATORY CERTIFICATION- If the Secretary finds, after
 reasonable notice and opportunity for a hearing, that a laboratory which
 holds a certificate pursuant to section 353 has violated section 2701,
 the Secretary may suspend, revoke or limit such certification in accordance
 with the procedures established in section 353(k).
 `(i) EXCLUSION FROM OTHER PROGRAMS- The Secretary may exclude from
 participation in any program under title XVIII of the Social Security
 Act, any individual or entity that the Secretary determines has violated
 section 2701 and may direct that such individual and entity be excluded
 from participation in any State health care program receiving Federal funds.
 `(j) FAILURE TO REPORT INFORMATION- Any person who knowingly fails to comply
 with a reporting requirement imposed under this title shall be subject to
 a civil money penalty of not more than $10,000 for each day for which such
 required reporting is not complied with. The provisions of section 1128A
 of the Social Security Act (other than the first sentence of subsection
 (a) and subsection (b)) shall apply to a civil money penalty assessed
 under the previous sentence in the same manner as such provisions apply
 to a penalty or proceeding under section 1128A(a).
`SEC. 2708. RIGHT OF PERSON INJURED.
 `Any person who pays any claim, bill or other demand for payment for health
 or health-related items or services, where the person furnishing the items
 or services knew or should have known that they were furnished pursuant to
 a referral prohibited under section 2701, may sue therefore in any district
 court in the United States in the district in which the defendant resides
 or is found or has an agent, without respect to the amount in controversy,
 and shall recover the amount of his payment, the cost of suit, including
 a reasonable attorney's fee.
`SEC. 2709. DEFINITIONS.
 `As used in this subtitle:
 `(1) Compensation arrangement- The term `compensation arrangement' means
 any payment (whether directly or indirectly, overtly or covertly, in cash
 or in kind) made by an entity to a physician (or immediate family member).
 `(2) EMPLOYEE- The term `employee' means an individual who would be
 considered to be employed by an entity under the usual common law rules
 applicable in determining the employer-employee relationship (as applied
 for purposes of section 3121(d)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986).
 `(3) FAIR MARKET VALUE- The term `fair market value' means the value of
 items or services in arms length transactions, consistent with the general
 market value of such items or services, and, with respect to rentals or
 leases, the value of rental property for general commercial purposes (not
 taking into account its intended use) and, in the case of a lease of space
 or equipment, not adjusted to reflect the additional value the prospective
 lessee or lessor would attribute to the proximity or convenience to sources
 of referrals or business.
 `(4) GROUP PRACTICE- The term `group practice' means a group of two or more
 physicians legally organized as a partnership, professional corporation,
 foundation, not-for-profit corporation, faculty practice plan, or similar
 association--
 `(A) in which each physician who is a member of the group provides
 substantially the full range of services which the physician routinely
 provides (including medical care, consultation, diagnosis, or treatment)
 through the joint use of shared office space, facilities, equipment,
 and personnel;
 `(B) for which substantially all of the services of the physicians who
 are members of the group are provided through the group and are billed in
 the name of the group and amounts so received are treated as receipts of
 the group;
 `(C) in which the overhead expenses of and the income from the practice
 are distributed in accordance with methods previously determined by members
 of the group; and
 `(D) which meets such other standards as the Secretary may impose by
 regulation.
In the case of a faculty practice plan associated with a hospital with an
approved medical residency training program in which physician members may
provide a variety of different specialty services and provide professional
services both within and outside the group (as well as perform other tasks
such as research), subparagraph (D) shall be applied only with respect to
the services provided within the faculty practice plan.
 `(5) HEALTH AND HEALTH-RELATED ITEMS AND SERVICES- The term `health and
 health-related items and services' shall be construed to have the broadest
 meaning practicable, and shall include, at a minimum, the medical and other
 health services specified in section 1861(s) of the Social Security Act.
 `(6) IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER- The term `immediate family member' shall
 include spouses, natural and adoptive parents, natural and adoptive children,
 natural and adopted siblings, stepparents, stepchildren and stepsiblings,
 fathers-in-law, mothers-in-law, brothers-in-law, sisters-in-law, sons-in-law
 and daughters-in-law, grandparents and grandchildren, and such additional
 family members as may be specified in regulations adopted by the Secretary.
 `(7) PHYSICIAN- The term `physician' means--
 `(A) a doctor of medicine or osteopathy legally authorized to practice
 medicine and perform surgery by the State in which such individual performs
 such function or action;
 `(B) a doctor of dental surgery or of dental medicine who is legally
 authorized to practice dentistry in the State in which such individual
 performs such functions;
 `(C) a doctor of podiatric medicine;
 `(D) a doctor of optometry; or
 `(E) a chiropractor.
 `(8) PHYSICIAN SERVICES- The term `physician services' means professional
 services performed by physicians, including surgery, consultation, and home,
 office and institutional calls.
 `(9) REMUNERATION- The term `remuneration' means the provision of something
 of value that is not incident to the entity's performance of, or the
 physician's payment for, the services that are the subject of the referral.
 `(10) THIRD PARTY PAYOR- The term `third party payor' means any health
 care insurer, including any hospital services corporation, health services
 corporation, medical expense indemnity corporation, mutual insurance
 company, or self-insured corporation, that provides coverage for health
 or health-related items or service.
`SEC. 2710. NO EXEMPTION FROM ANTITRUST LAWS.
 `Nothing in this title shall be construed to create any immunity to any
 civil or criminal action under any Federal or State antitrust law, or to
 alter or restrict in any matter the applicability of any Federal or State
 antitrust law.
`Subtitle B--Restrictions on Billing
`SEC. 2721. PROHIBITION.
 `(a) BILLING OF OTHERS FOR ANCILLARY SERVICES- Except as provided in section
 2722, it shall be unlawful for any person (including any individual or
 entity) who furnishes ancillary health services (as defined in section
 2724(e)) to present or cause to be presented, a claim, bill or demand for
 payment to any person other than the patient receiving such services.
 `(b) BILLING OF RECIPIENT OF SERVICES- It shall be unlawful for any
 physician, or the agent of any physician, to present, or cause to be
 presented, a claim, bill or demand for payment for ancillary services to
 any recipient of such services unless the services covered by the claim,
 bill or demand were furnished--
 `(1) personally by or under the supervision of the referring physician;
 `(2) personally by or under the supervision of a physician who is a member
 of the same group practice as the referring physician; or
 `(3) personally by individuals who are employed by such physician or group
 practice and who are personally supervised by the physician or by another
 physician in the group practice.
`SEC. 2722. EXCEPTIONS.
 `Notwithstanding the provisions of section 2721, a person who furnishes
 ancillary health services to an individual may present, or cause to
 be presented, a claim, bill or demand for payment for actual services
 rendered to--
 `(1) an immediate family member of the recipient of the services or any
 other person legally responsible for the debts or care of the recipient
 of the services;
 `(2) a third-party payor designated by the recipient of the services;
 `(3) a health maintenance organization in which the recipient of the
 services is enrolled;
 `(4) a hospital or skilled nursing facility where the recipient of the
 services was an inpatient or outpatient at the time the services were
 provided;
 `(5) an employer where the recipient of the services is an employee of
 such employer and the employer is responsible for payment for the services;
 `(6) a governmental agency or specified agent, on behalf of the recipient
 of the services;
 `(7) a substance abuse program where the clients of such a program were
 the recipient of the services;
 `(8) a clinic or other health care provider that has been designated
 (or that is operated by an organization that has been designated) as
 tax-exempt pursuant to section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of
 1986, whose purpose is the promotion of public health, where the services
 rendered relate to testing for sexually transmitted disease, acquired immune
 deficiency syndrome, pregnancy, pregnancy termination or other conditions
 where the Secretary has determined that compliance with section 2721 could
 seriously compromise the recipient's need for confidentiality;
 `(9) a person engaged in bona fide research studies;
 `(10) the party requesting the ancillary health services where Federal,
 State or local law requires that the identity of the recipient be kept
 confidential;
 `(11) another person furnishing the same ancillary health services for
 which payment is sought (hereafter referred to in this paragraph as
 the `requesting party') where the person presenting, or causing to be
 presented, the claim, bill or demand for payment furnished the services
 at the request of the requesting party, except that the requesting party
 may not be a facility owned or operated by the physician requesting the
 ancillary health service; and
 `(12) an entity approved to receive such claims, bills or demands by the
 Secretary in regulations.
The persons described in paragraphs (1) through (12) may present, or cause
to be presented, a claim, bill or demand for payment for such ancillary
services to the responsible party.
`SEC. 2723. SANCTIONS.
 `(a) PAYMENT- No payment may be made for a service that is provided in
 violation of section 2721.
 `(b) COLLECTION OF AMOUNTS-
 `(1) LIABILITY ON COLLECTION- If a person collects any amounts that were
 billed in violation of section 2721(a), such person shall be liable for,
 and shall refund on a timely basis to the individual from whom such amounts
 were collected, any amounts so collected.
 `(2) COLLECTION BY PHYSICIAN- If a physician collects any amounts from a
 recipient of services, or from another person on behalf of the recipient
 of services (including a third-party payor), that were billed in violation
 of section 2721(b), such physician shall be liable for, and shall refund
 on a timely basis to the recipient or person, any amounts so collected.
 `(c) REPEATED CLAIMS- Any person that presents, or causes to be presented,
 on a repeated basis a bill or a claim that such person knows, or should have
 known, is for a service for which payment may not be made under subsection
 (a), or for which a refund has not been made under subsection (b), shall
 be subject to a civil money penalty of not more than $5,000 for each such
 bill or claim. The provisions of section 1128A of the Social Security Act
 (other than the first sentence of subsection (a) and subsection (b)) shall
 apply to a civil money penalty assessed under the previous sentence in the
 same manner as such provisions apply to a penalty or proceeding under such
 section 1128A(a).
 `(d) SUSPENSION OF LABORATORY CERTIFICATION- If the Secretary finds, after
 reasonable notice and opportunity for a hearing, that a laboratory which
 holds a certificate pursuant to section 353 has violated section 2721,
 the Secretary may suspend, revoke or limit such certification in accordance
 with the procedures established in section 353(k).
 `(e) EXCLUSION FROM OTHER PROGRAMS-
 `(1) AUTHORITY- The Secretary may exclude from participation in any program
 under title XVIII of the Social Security Act, any individual or entity
 that the Secretary determines has violated section 2721 and may direct
 that such individual and entity be excluded from participation in any
 State health care program receiving Federal funds.
 `(2) APPLICATION OF OTHER LAW- The provisions of section 1128(e) of the
 Social Security Act shall apply to any exclusion under paragraph (1) in the
 same manner as such provisions apply to a proceeding under such section 1128.
`SEC. 2724. REGULATIONS.
 `The Secretary shall by regulation impose such other requirements as may
 be necessary to implement the purposes of this subtitle.
`SEC. 2725. DEFINITIONS.
 `As used in this subtitle:
 `(1) ANCILLARY HEALTH SERVICES- The term `ancillary health services' means--
 `(A) diagnostic laboratory tests;
 `(B) diagnostic x-ray tests and other diagnostic imaging services including
 CT and magnetic resonance imaging services;
 `(C) other diagnostic tests;
 `(D) durable medical equipment; and
 `(E) physical therapy services.
 `(2) GROUP PRACTICE- The term `group practice' means a group of two or more
 physicians legally organized as a partnership, professional corporation,
 foundation, not-for-profit corporation, faculty practice plan, or similar
 association--
 `(A) in which each physician who is a member of the group provides
 substantially the full range of services that the physician routinely
 provides (including medical care, consultation, diagnosis, or treatment)
 through the joint use of shared office space, facilities, equipment,
 and personnel;
 `(B) for which substantially all of the services of the physicians who
 are members of the group are provided through the group and are billed in
 the name of the group and amounts so received are treated as receipts of
 the group;
 `(C) in which the overhead expenses of and the income from the practice
 are distributed in accordance with methods previously determined by members
 of the group; and
 `(D) which meets such other standards as the Secretary may impose by
 regulation.
In the case of a faculty practice plan associated with a hospital with an
approved medical residency training program in which physician members may
provide a variety of different specialty services and provide professional
services both within and outside the group (as well as perform other tasks
such as research), the definition of such term shall be limited with respect
to the services provided outside of the faculty practice plan.
 `(3) IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER- The term `immediate family member' shall
 include spouses, natural and adoptive parents, natural and adoptive children,
 natural and adopted siblings, stepparents, stepchildren and stepsiblings,
 fathers-in-law, mothers-in-law, brothers-in-law, sisters-in-law, sons-in-law
 and daughters-in-law, grandparents and grandchildren, and such additional
 family members as may be specified in regulations adopted by the Secretary.
 `(4) PHYSICIAN- The term `physician' has the same meaning given such term
 in section 2709(7).
 `(5) THIRD PARTY PAYOR- The term `third party payor' has the same meaning
 given such term in section 2709(10).'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Sections 2701 through 2714 of the Public Health Service Act (42
 U.S.C. 300cc through 300cc-15) are redesignated as sections 2801 through
 2814, respectively.
 (2)(A) Sections 465(f) and 497 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 286(f) and 289) are
 amended by striking out `2701' each place that such appears and inserting
 in lieu thereof `2801'.
 (B) Section 305(i) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 242c(i)) is amended by striking
 out `2711' each place that such appears and inserting in lieu thereof `2811'.
SEC. 3. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this section, this Act shall become
 effective January 1, 1994.
 (b) EXCEPTIONS- Notwithstanding subsection (a)--
 (1) section 2707(c) of the Public Health Service Act (as added by section
 2(a)) shall become effective on January 1, 1994, and shall apply to all
 policies, contracts and certificates delivered or issued for delivery on
 or after such date and, as to those policies, contracts and certificates
 delivered or issued for delivery prior to such date, on the date such
 policies, contracts or certificates are renewed, modified, altered or
 amended, except that the Secretary may adopt such regulations and take
 such steps as may be appropriate prior to such effective date; and
 (2) subtitle B of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act (as added
 by section 2(a)) shall become effective on January 1, 1994.
 (c) REGULATIONS- Not later than January 1, 1994, the Secretary of Health
 and Human Services shall promulgate such regulations as may be appropriate
 to carry out this Act.