B37 7-26-89 [OC's]
HR 2980 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2980
To amend title XVIII of the Social Security Act to ensure, through a USHealth
Program, access for all Americans to quality health care while containing
the costs of the health care system, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
July 24, 1989
Mr. ROYBAL (for himself, Mr. RANGEL, Mr. DYMALLY, and Mr. ACKERMAN) introduced
the following bill; which was referred jointly to the Committees on Ways
and Means, and Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To amend title XVIII of the Social Security Act to ensure, through a USHealth
Program, access for all Americans to quality health care while containing
the costs of the health care system, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `USHealth Program Act'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents of this Act is as follows:
DIVISION A--USHEALTH PROGRAM
TITLE I--ELIGIBILITY AND ENROLLMENT
Sec. 1101. Eligibility.
TITLE II--BENEFITS AND PROVIDERS
Sec. 1201. Description of benefits.
Sec. 1202. Changes in exclusions.
Sec. 1203. Standards for certification of certain services.
Sec. 1204. Development of medical care access facilities.
Sec. 1205. Rural health clinic demonstration program.
Sec. 1206. Rural and central city health care research and demonstrations.
Sec. 1207. Miscellaneous provisions.
TITLE III--PAYMENTS FOR SERVICES
Sec. 1301. Limiting rate of increase of all payment amounts.
Sec. 1302. Payments for inpatient hospital services.
Sec. 1303. Payments for other services.
Sec. 1304. Direct payment for all services and use of carriers.
Sec. 1305. Changes in HMO coverage and payment.
TITLE IV--FINANCING PROGRAM
Sec. 1401. Limited coinsurance and copayments with protection against
catastrophic expenses.
Sec. 1402. Extension of hospital insurance tax to all wages.
Sec. 1403. Elimination of part B medicare premium for disabled beneficiaries
and phase-out of part B medicare premium for elderly beneficiaries.
Sec. 1404. Changes in medicare supplemental premium.
Sec. 1405. Excise tax on wages and self-employment income.
Sec. 1406. Increase in Federal excise tax on cigarettes and application of
increase to USHealth Trust Fund.
Sec. 1407. State contributions.
Sec. 1408. Tax surcharge on all taxpayers to assure funding of the USHealth
Program.
Sec. 1409. USHealth Program Trust Fund.
Sec. 1410. Repeal of exclusion from income of employer health insurance
contributions.
TITLE V--QUALITY ASSURANCE
Sec. 1501. National Council on Quality Assurance.
Sec. 1502. Emphasis by peer review organizations on quality assurance.
Sec. 1503. Extension of quality assurance to all services.
Sec. 1504. Consumer boards.
Sec. 1505. Quality assurance hot-line.
Sec. 1506. Funding of increased activities.
Sec. 1507. Assuring quality of care management and home care services.
Sec. 1508. Hospital discharge planning process.
SEC. 1509. Assuring pre-paid organizations provide quality, accessible mental
health services.
Sec. 1510. Consumers' bill of rights.
Sec. 1511. Health and long-term care ombudsman.
Sec. 1512. Studies and reports.
TITLE VI--ADMINISTRATION AND MISCELLANEOUS
Sec. 1601. Establishment of USHealth Administration as a separate, independent
agency; responsibilities of the agency.
Sec. 1602. Transfers to the new USHealth Administration.
Sec. 1603. Transitional rules.
Sec. 1604. Demonstration projects.
Sec. 1605. Effective dates of title.
Sec. 1606. Conforming amendments to the Social Security Act and related
provisions.
Sec. 1607. Rules of construction.
TITLE VII--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Sec. 1701. Repeal of medicaid program.
Sec. 1702. General effective date and savings provision for medicare and
medicaid programs.
Sec. 1703. Select additional conforming and technical amendments to title
XVIII of the Social Security Act.
DIVISION B--TRANSITION AND SYSTEM-BUILDING PROVISIONS
TITLE I--MEDICAID EXPANSION TO COVER THE POOR
Sec. 2101. Transitional expansion of medicaid eligibility.
TITLE II--PRIVATE HEALTH INSURANCE DEDUCTION FOR SELF-EMPLOYED
Sec. 2201. Deduction for health insurance costs of self-employed.
TITLE III--RURAL HEALTH CARE DEVELOPMENT
Sec. 2301. Special payment rules for payment for rural medical practice,
rural nursing facilities, and rural home health agencies.
Sec. 2302. Coverage of services of medical care access facilities.
Sec. 2303. Placement of Office of Rural Health Care in the Office of the
Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Sec. 2304. Rural health services block grant.
Sec. 2305. Medical practice development grants.
Sec. 2306. Rural health care research projects.
Sec. 2307. Alcohol, drug abuse, and mental health block grant.
Sec. 2308. National Institute of Mental Health.
TITLE IV--DIRECT REIMBURSEMENT OF NURSE SPECIALISTS
Sec. 2401. Direct reimbursement of nurse specialists.
TITLE V--HEALTH CARE PERSONNEL DEVELOPMENT
Sec. 2501. National Health Service Corps scholarship program and loan
repayment program.
Sec. 2502. Scholarships and loan repayments.
Sec. 2503. Health care personnel training programs.
Sec. 2504. Area health education centers.
Sec. 2505. Continuing education for nurses in rural areas.
TITLE VI--MENTAL HEALTH CARE DEVELOPMENT
Subtitle A--Amendments to Public Health Service Act
Sec. 2601. Research and demonstration projects with respect to mental health
of elderly individuals.
Sec. 2602. Quality assurance and program effectiveness study by Institute
of Medicine.
Sec. 2603. Additional studies on mental health services.
Sec. 2604. Effective date.
Subtitle B--Changes in Medicare and Medicaid Programs
Sec. 2611. Requiring provision of outpatient mental health services under
the medicaid program.
Sec. 2612. Classification of institution for mental diseases under medicaid.
Sec. 2613. Conditions of participation for nursing facilities under medicare
and medicaid programs.
Sec. 2614. Additional conditions of participation for mental health providers.
Sec. 2615. Peer review of mental health services.
Sec. 2616. Review of levels of payment for mental health services.
TITLE VII--ALZHEIMER'S ASSISTANCE DEVELOPMENT
Subtitle A--Grants to States for Alzheimer's Disease Programs
Sec. 2701. Grants to States for Alzheimer's disease programs.
Subtitle B--Improvement of Services under Medicare and Medicaid Programs
Sec. 2711. Assuring adequate funding for treatment of individuals with
Alzheimer's disease or related disorders.
Sec. 2712. Upgrading quality of care reviews for heavy care patients.
Sec. 2713. Assuring access to needed services.
TITLE VIII--COMMUNITY AND MIGRANT HEALTH CENTERS EXPANSION
Sec. 2801. Migrant health centers; community health centers.
DIVISION A--USHEALTH PROGRAM
TITLE I--ELIGIBILITY AND ENROLLMENT
SEC. 1101. ELIGIBILITY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1811 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395c)
 is amended to read as follows:
`DESCRIPTION OF PROGRAM
 `SEC. 1810. The USHealth Program provides comprehensive protection against
 the costs of health and long-term care for permanent residents in the
 United States, without regard to age or disability status.
`ELIGIBILITY AND ENTITLEMENT
 `SEC. 1811. (a) ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS- Each of the following individuals
 is eligible for health care benefits under and in accordance with this title:
 `(1) Each citizen or national of the United States.
 `(2) Each alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence or otherwise
 permanently residing in the United States under color of law, including
 aliens lawfully admitted for temporary residence under section 210 or 245A
 of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
 `(3) Each alien admitted to the United States as an officer or employee
 (or member of the immediate family of such officer or employee)--
 `(A) of a foreign government or an instrumentality of a foreign government,
 or
 `(B) of an international organization (as such term is defined in the
 International Organizations Immunities Act),
if the government or organization, respectively, has entered into an agreement
described in subsection (d)(1) with the United States.
 `(4) Each alien admitted as a temporary visitor to or while traveling
 through the United States and who is a national or citizen of a foreign
 state which has entered into an agreement described in subsection (d)(2).
 `(b) ENTITLEMENT- Each eligible individual is entitled to benefits under
 this part for services furnished during any period (beginning on or after
 January 1, 1994) in which the individual is an eligible individual, except
 that payment for such benefits shall not be made until the individual (1)
 is identified as an eligible individual, and (2) a suitable identification
 account number has been established for purposes of the administration of
 this title.
 `(c) ENROLLMENT- The USHealth Board shall provide, in coordination with
 the Secretary of the Treasury and the Administrator of Social Security,
 for the identification of eligible individuals and the issuance of suitable
 identification account numbers for purposes of the administration of this
 title. In conducting such activities, the Board shall seek to assure that--
 `(1) individuals who are eligible individuals at birth are identified as
 such at birth, and
 `(2) other eligible individuals are identified at the time of issuance of
 a Social Security account number.
 `(d) AGREEMENTS WITH FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS AND INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS-
 `(1) RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS OR INTERNATIONAL
 ORGANIZATIONS- The USHealth Board, in consultation with the Secretary
 of State, shall recommend to the President that the President enter into
 an executive agreement with the government of a foreign state or with an
 international organization under which officers and employees (and members
 of the immediate families of such officers and employees) of the government
 or organization who are employed and residing in the United States are made
 eligible for health care benefits under and in accordance with this title
 in return for the payment, with respect to such individual, of the amounts
 that are equivalent to the rate of payment that would be applicable with
 respect to the individual under section 1876.
 `(2) FOREIGN VISITOR AGREEMENTS- The USHealth Board, after consultation
 with the Secretary of State, shall recommend to the President that the
 President enter into an executive agreement with the government of any
 foreign state under which--
 `(A) the nationals or citizens of that national who are foreign visitors
 in the United States would be enrolled in a qualified health plan in the
 United States, and
 `(B) nationals and permanent resident aliens (described in subsection
 (a)(2)) of the United States would receive comparable health care benefits
 while temporarily visiting in or traveling through that other state,
but such recommendation shall only be made if the Board determines that such
an agreement is in the national interest.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) SOCIAL SECURITY ACT- (A) Title II of the Social Security Act is amended
 by striking sections 226 and 226A (42 U.S.C. 426, 426-1).
 (B) Title XVIII of such Act is amended by striking sections 1804, 1818,
 1831, 1836, 1837, and 1838 (42 U.S.C. 1395b-2, 1395i-2, 1395j, 1395o,
 1395p, 1395q).
 (C) Section 1131(a)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1320b-1(a)(1)) is amended by
 inserting `or' at the end of subparagraph (A) and by striking subparagraph
 (C).
 (D) Section 201(h) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 401(h)) is amended by striking
 `(other than section 226)'.
 (E) Section 210 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 410) is amended by striking subsection
 (p).
 (F) Section 233(c) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 433(c)) is amended by striking
 paragraph (3).
 (G) Section 1881 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395rr) is amended by striking
 subsection (a).
 (2) RAILROAD RETIREMENT ACT- Section 7 of the Railroad Retirement Act of
 1974 (45 U.S.C. 231f) is amended by striking subsection (d).
 (3) MEDICAID PROGRAM- Title XIX of the Social Security Act is repealed.
TITLE II--BENEFITS AND PROVIDERS
SEC. 1201. DESCRIPTION OF BENEFITS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1812 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395d)
 is amended--
 (1) by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
 `(a) The benefits provided to an individual by the program under this title
 consists of entitlement to have payment made on his behalf for the following:
 `(1) Inpatient hospital services and inpatient psychiatric hospital services.
 `(2) Medical and other health services.
 `(3) Comprehensive outpatient rehabilitation facility services.
 `(4) Health care services of a medical care access facility.
 `(5) Extended care services and services of a nursing facility (as defined
 in section 1819A(a)).
 `(6) Home health services.
 `(7) Hospice care.
 `(8) Long-term care for a chronically ill individual.
 `(9) Alcohol and drug abuse rehabilitation services (as defined by the
 USHealth Board).
 `(10) Outpatient mental health services (including psychotherapy and
 psychoanalysis) furnished in a community mental health center or by a
 physician, clinical psychologist, clinical social worker, or psychiatric
 nurse specialist (or other qualified provider specified by the Secretary
 in regulation) which the provider is legally authorized to perform under
 State law (or the State regulatory mechanism provided by State law) and as
 would otherwise be covered if furnished by a physician or as an incident
 to a physician's service.';
 (2) by striking subsections (b), (c), and (e); and
 (3) in subsection (d)--
 (A) by striking `part' each place it appears and inserting `title',
 (B) by striking `Secretary' each place it appears and inserting `USHealth
 Board',
 (C) in paragraph (2)(B)(i), by striking `(a)(4)' and inserting `(a)(6)',
 (D) by redesignating such subsection as subsection (b).
 (b) EXPANSION OF MEDICAL AND OTHER HEALTH SERVICES- (1) Section 1861(s)
 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(s)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2)(L), by inserting before the semicolon the following:
 `, and nurse practitioner and clinical nurse specialist services';
 (2) in paragraph (8), by striking `(other than dental)',
 (3) by redesignating paragraphs (12) through (15) as paragraphs (24)
 through (27), respectively,
 (4) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (10),
 (5) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (11) and inserting a
 semicolon, and
 (6) by inserting after paragraph (11) the following new paragraphs:
 `(12) such early and periodic screening and diagnosis of individuals under
 21 years of age to ascertain their physical or mental defects, and such
 health care, treatment, and other measures to correct or ameliorate defects
 and chronic conditions discovered thereby, as are provided in regulations
 of the USHealth Board;
 `(13) family planning services and supplies furnished (directly or under
 arrangements with others) to individuals of child-bearing age who desire
 such services and supplies;
 `(14) medical care, or any other type of remedial care specified by the
 USHealth Board and recognized under State law, furnished by licensed
 practitioners within the scope of their practice as defined by State law;
 `(15) private duty nursing services;
 `(16) dental services;
 `(17) physical therapy and related services, and speech-language pathology
 and audiology;
 `(18) subject to subsection (j), dentures, and prosthetic devices, and
 eyeglasses prescribed by a physician; and
 `(19) other diagnostic, screening, preventive, and rehabilitative services.'.
 (2) Section 1862 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395y) is amended by adding at
 the end the following new subsections:
 `(j) Notwithstanding section 1861(s), the term `medical and other health
 services' does not include routine dental care (including dentures) and
 eyeglasses until the earlier of--
 `(1) January 1, 2000, or
 `(2) January 1 of the first year for which the USHealth Board determines
 that the total expenditures under the USHealth Program for the year,
 with the addition of such services, will not exceed 12 percent of the
 gross national product for that year.
 `(k)(1) The USHealth Board shall review the coverage under this title of
 inpatient and outpatient mental health services with respect to the access
 of beneficiaries to such services and the cost of providing such services.
 `(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, the USHealth Board
 shall, for mental health services furnished on or after January 1, 1994,
 provide for such change in the limitations on payment amounts and coverage
 of services as will ensure full appropriate access to such services while
 containing the costs for such services.'.
 (c) DEFINITIONS RELATING TO LONG-TERM CARE, NURSE PRACTITIONER AND CLINICAL
 NURSE SPECIALIST SERVICES, AND MEDICAL CARE ACCESS FACILITIES CARE MANAGEMENT
 SERVICES, CHRONICALLY ILL INDIVIDUAL, AND LONG-TERM CARE MANAGEMENT AGENCY-
 (1) Section 1861 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x) is amended by adding at
 the end the following new subsections:
`Long-Term Care; Chronically Ill Individual; Long-Term Care Management Agency
 `(mm)(1) The term `long-term care' means--
 `(A) care management services (as defined in paragraph (2)(A)) furnished
 by a long-term care management agency (as defined in paragraph (5)), and
 `(B) items and services described in paragraph (2)(B) furnished to an
 individual, who is under the care of a physician, by a qualified home
 health agency (in the case of items and services described in clauses
 (i) through (vi) of paragraph (2)(B)) or (in the case of other items and
 services) any qualified agency (or by others under arrangements with them
 made by such an agency) under arrangements with it made by the long-term
 care management agency, under a written plan of care (for furnishing such
 items and services and other related items and services to such individual)
 established and periodically reviewed by a trained care management team of a
 long-term care management agency and approved by the individual's attending
 physician (or, in the absence of an attending physician, any physician),
 which items and services are provided in a qualified facility or on a
 visiting basis in a place of residence used as such individual's home.
 `(2)(A) The term `care management services' means on-going services
 provided to ensure effective, efficient, and coordinated delivery of
 long-term care, including--
 `(i) making initial and periodic certifications under section 1814(a)(8)(A)
 respecting whether an individual is a chronically ill individual,
 `(ii) developing individual plans of care which (I) are based on an in-person
 assessment of the individual's health status, functional capacity, and
 social and family support system (including the need for limited respite
 for family caregivers) and on a review of home health services, extended
 care services, and other authorized services provided to the individual
 under this title, and (II) provide the most comprehensive services,
 as necessary to the needs of the individual, as is feasible taking into
 account payment limits established under section 1814(l);
 `(iii) periodic review and revision of such plans, in accordance with
 regulations promulgated under section 1893(b)(7)(C);
 `(iv) making arrangements with one or more qualified agencies for the
 provision of care and services prescribed under the individual's plan
 of care;
 `(v) promptly providing the carrier with a copy of the plan of care
 developed under clause (ii) and appropriate identifying information for
 each qualified agency with which it has arrangements for providing the
 long-term care under the plan of care; and
 `(vi) follow-up and on-going monitoring of patient and services delivery
 in accordance with regulations promulgated under section 1893(b)(7)(D).
The certifications under clause (i) and the assessments under clause (ii)(I)
shall follow national standard protocols established by the USHealth Board
in consultation with the National Council on Quality Assurance.
 `(B) The items and services described in this subparagraph (and included
 in long-term care under paragraph (1)(B)) are as follows:
 `(i) Nursing care provided by or under the supervision of a registered
 professional nurse.
 `(ii) Services of a homemaker/home health aide who has successfully met
 the training requirements of section 1893(a)(1)(B).
 `(iii) Medical social services.
 `(iv) Physical, occupational, speech, respiratory, or corrective therapy.
 `(v) Medical supplies (other than drugs and biologicals) and durable
 medical equipment, while under a plan of care described in paragraph (1)(B).
 `(vi) Patient and caregiver (including family caregiver) education,
 training, and counseling aimed at continuing and enhancing the care and
 assistance provided to the patient by the patient or caregiver, respectively.
 `(vii) Any of the foregoing items and services which are provided on an
 outpatient basis, under arrangements made by the long-term care management
 agency, at a hospital, nursing facility, or at a rehabilitation center
 which meets such standards as may be prescribed in regulations, and--
 `(I) the furnishing of which involves the use of equipment of such a
 nature that the items and services cannot readily be made available to
 the individual in such place of residence, or
 `(II) which are furnished at such facility while the individual is there
 to receive any such item or service described in subclause (I).
 `(viii) Day health care (as determined by the USHealth Board) when part of
 a physician plan of care and essential to the individual being maintained
 in the home.
 `(ix) Respite care (as defined by the USHealth Board, but including at
 least in-home care for a chronically dependent individual for at least
 120 hours in any 12-month period).
 `(x) Services in a nursing facility (as defined under section 1819A(a)).
 `(xi) Transportation, but only if required by the beneficiary in order to
 access needed health and long-term care services.
 `(xii) Other long-term care related services, including other personal care
 services, as determined by the USHealth Board, as authorized by a long-term
 care management agency and under the condition that the cost of these
 services when combined with other long-term care services being provided
 does not exceed the expected cost of the previous long-term care benefits.
 `(3) The term `chronically ill individual' means an individual who has been
 certified by a trained care management team of a long-term care management
 agency, in consultation with the individual's attending physician (or,
 in the absence of such a physician, any physician), as--
 `(A) being unable to perform (without substantial assistance from another
 individual) at least 2 age-appropriate activities of daily living (as
 defined in paragraph (4)),
 `(B) having a similar level of disability due to cognitive impairment,
 as prescribed in regulations by the USHealth Board (in consultation with
 experts in the field of geriatric psychiatry and other appropriate health
 professionals and representatives of individuals afflicted with brain
 disorders including Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease), or
 `(C) requires both a medical device to compensate for the loss of a vital
 body function necessary to avert death or major loss of bodily functional
 capacity and substantial and ongoing nursing care to avert death or
 further disability.
 `(4) For purposes of paragraph (3) and for adults, each of the following
 is an activity of daily living:
 `(A) BATHING- The overall complex behavior of getting water and cleansing
 the whole body, including turning on the water for a bath, shower, or
 sponge bath, getting to, in, and out of a tub or shower, and washing and
 drying oneself.
 `(B) DRESSING- The overall complex behavior of getting clothes from closets
 and drawers and then getting dressed.
 `(C) TOILETING- The act of going to the toilet room for bowel and bladder
 function, transferring on and off the toilet, cleaning after elimination,
 and arranging clothes.
 `(D) TRANSFER- The process of getting in and out of bed or in and out of
 a chair or wheelchair.
 `(E) EATING- The process of getting food from a plate or its equivalent
 into the mouth.
 `(5) The term `long-term care management agency' means a agency or
 organization, or a subdivision of such an agency or organization, which--
 `(A) is a State government agency or, if there is no State government agency
 qualified to act as a long-term care management agency, another government
 agency; except that the agency or organization may be a private, nonprofit
 agency or organization with respect to a service area only if there is no
 government long-term care management agency serving the area;
 `(B) is experienced in providing care management services or related services
 to chronically ill individuals and is capable of completing the assessment
 and plan of care and arranging for services under paragraph (2) within a
 reasonable time period following referral to the agency or organization;
 `(C) provides only care management services under this title and makes
 arrangements with qualified agencies (with which it does not have a direct
 or indirect ownership interest) to provide long-term care the agency or
 organization prescribes;
 `(D) has policies, established by a group of professionals (associated
 with the agency or organization) including one or more registered nurses,
 one or more physicians, and one or more social workers, to govern the
 services described in subparagraph (B) which it provides;
 `(E) maintains one or more teams of professionals, which are trained in
 the needs of chronically ill individuals and which includes registered
 nurses, social workers, physicians, rehabilitation professionals, and
 other health care professionals as appropriate in individual cases, to
 provide care management;
 `(F) in the case of an agency or organization in any State in which State or
 applicable local law provides for the licensing of agencies or organization
 of this nature, (i) is licensed pursuant to such law, or (ii) is approved,
 by the agency of such State or locality responsible for licensing agencies
 or organizations of this nature, as meeting the standards established for
 such licensing;
 `(G) has in effect an overall plan and budget that meets the requirements
 of subsection (z) (other than paragraph (2) thereof); and
 `(H) meets the additional conditions of participation specified in section
 1893(b) and such other conditions of participation as the USHealth Board,
 in consultation with the National Council on Quality Assurance, may find
 necessary in the interest of the health and safety of individuals who are
 furnished services by such agency or organization and for the effective
 and efficient operation of the program.
The USHealth Board may provide for a temporary waiver of any of the
requirements of any subparagraph (other than subparagraph (A) or (B)) of this
paragraph for such period (not to exceed one year, but subject to renewal) as
the Board deems appropriate in the case of an agency or organization serving an
area that is a rural area or that is designated as a health manpower shortage
area under section 332 of the Public Health Service Act if (i) failure to waive
such requirements would significantly limit access to long-term care services
to beneficiaries residing in the area, (ii) the agency or organization has
made and continues to make good faith efforts to meet such requirements, and
(iii) waiver of such requirements does not jeopardize the health, safety,
or well-being of beneficiaries receiving long-term home services.
 `(6) The term `qualified home health agency' means a home health agency
 which--
 `(A) provides directly the items and services described in subparagraphs
 (A), (B), and (F) of paragraph (1), and
 `(B) either provides directly or has made arrangements for providing
 physical and speech therapy.
`Nurse Practitioner and Clinical Nurse Specialist Services
 `(nn)(1) The term `nurse practitioner and clinical nurse specialist services'
 means such services (and such services and supplies furnished as an incident
 to the services) furnished by a nurse practitioner or clinical nurse
 specialist which the nurse practitioner or clinical nurse specialist is
 legally authorized to perform under State law as would otherwise be covered
 if furnished by a physician or as an incident to a physician's service,
 whether or not the practitioner or specialist is under the supervision of,
 or associated with, a physician or other health care provider.
 `(2) The terms `nurse practitioner' and `clinical nurse specialist' mean
 an individual who--
 `(A) is licensed to practice professional nursing,
 `(B) holds a master's degree in nursing or a related field or has completed
 a nurse practitioner continuing education program, and
 `(C) is certified (or certified eligible) as such a practitioner or
 specialist by a national professional organization recognized by the
 Secretary.
`Medical Care Access Facility and Related Definitions
 `(oo)(1) The term `medical services of a medical care access facility'
 means the following services provided by or under arrangements with a
 medical care access facility--
 `(A) inpatient care,
 `(B) emergency visits, and
 `(C) such services and such services and supplies furnished as an incident
 to services provided by a medical care access facility which the facility
 is legally authorized to provide and which would otherwise be covered if
 furnished by a physician or as an incident to physicians' services.
 `(2) The term `medical care access facility' means a facility which--
 `(A)(i) provides ambulatory, primary, emergency, urgent, and surgical care,
 (ii) provides basic inpatient care for at least 1, but not more than 10,
 inpatient beds and for stays not exceeding 48 hours (unless otherwise
 approved by a peer review organization), and (iii) provides ancillary
 services (including radiology and laboratory services);
 `(B)(i) is located in a rural area designated under section 330(a)(3)
 of the Public Health Service Act as a medically underserved area,
 `(ii) serves a frontier service area (as defined in paragraph (3)), or
 `(iii) is located in a county with a population of less than 20,000;
 `(E)(i) has a quality assurance plan approved by the Secretary, and (ii)
 has entered into a contract with a hospital or with a utilization and
 quality control peer review organization with a contract in effect under
 part B of title XI for the performance of utilization review with respect
 to services provided by the facility;
 `(F) has entered into an agreement to participate under the State program
 approved under title XIX in the State in which the facility is located;
 `(G) meets the additional requirements specified in paragraph (4) (relating
 to inpatient care);
 `(H) meets the additional requirements specified in paragraph (5) (relating
 to ambulatory care); and
 `(I) meets the additional requirements specified in paragraph (6) (relating
 to inpatient and ambulatory care).
A medical facility may meet the requirements of this paragraph with respect
to provision of medical care (including pharmacy services) through a contract
that assures, in a manner satisfactory to the Secretary, the availability
of such care.
 `(3) In this section, the term `frontier service area' means, with respect
 to a facility, a facility with a service area which--
 `(A) is at least 500 square miles,
 `(B) has a population density of less than 6 persons per square mile,
 `(C) is at least 30 minutes travel time from the nearest city with a
 population of at least 5,000, and
 `(D) serves a population of at least 1,000, but not more than 5,000.
 `(4) The additional requirements of this paragraph (relating to inpatient
 care) are as follows:
 `(A) To the extent inpatient services are actually being provided,
 the facility must meet such staffing requirements as would apply under
 subsection (e) to a hospital located in a rural area.
 `(B) The facility must be capable of staffing inpatient beds within 2
 hours of the time of need.
 `(C)(i) Except as provided in this subparagraph, the facility must meet the
 same standards as apply with respect to the provision of inpatient hospital
 services under this title with respect to a hospital located in a rural area.
 `(ii) The facility need not meet hospital standards relating to the number
 of hours during a day, or days during a week, in which the facility must
 be open.
 `(iii) The facility, instead of having a full-time, on-site dietician,
 pharmacist, laboratory technician, medical technologist, and radiological
 technologist, may provide for quality control of services provided by such
 individuals through such individuals on a part-time, off-site basis.
 `(D) The facility must have in effect a transfer agreement (meeting such
 terms as the Secretary may specify) between the facility and appropriate
 referral hospital or hospitals.
 `(E) Discharge planning must be provided under a contract with a nearby
 hospital.
 `(5) The additional requirements of this paragraph (relating to ambulatory
 care) are as follows:
 `(A) The facility must comply with standards for ambulatory care,
 such standards to be established by the Secretary in consultation with
 appropriate provider and consumer organizations.
 `(B) The standards established under subparagraph (A) shall include the
 following provisions:
 `(i) Multi-competent health care technicians may be used by the facility
 to staff the emergency room, to conduct basic laboratory tests, and to
 take basic x-rays. In the previous sentence, the term `multi-competent
 health care technician' means an individual who is skilled by education
 or experience to perform a number of routine laboratory procedures and
 radiography (chest, extremities, and abdomen) and who is trained as an
 emergency medical technician.
 `(ii) The competency of the laboratory and radiology departments of each
 facility must be certified by the hospital referred to in paragraph (4)(D).'.
 (2) Title XVIII of such Act is further amended by striking subsection (i)
 of section 1819 and inserting the following new section:
`NURSING FACILITY DEFINED
 `SEC. 1819A. (a) IN GENERAL- In this title, the term `nursing facility'
 means an institution (or a distinct part of an institution) which--
 `(1) is primarily engaged in providing to residents--
 `(A) skilled nursing care and related services for residents who require
 medical or nursing care,
 `(B) rehabilitation services for the rehabilitation of injured, disabled,
 or sick persons, or
 `(C) on a regular basis, provide health-related care and services to
 individuals who because of their mental or physical condition require
 care and services (above the level of room and board) which can be made
 available to them only through institutional facilities,
and is not primarily for the care and treatment of mental diseases; and
 `(2) meets the requirements of paragraphs (2) and (3) of section 1819(a)
 as they apply to a skilled nursing facility.
 `(b) APPLICATION OF NURSING FACILITY STANDARDS, ETC- The provisions
 of subsections (b) through (h) of section 1819 shall apply to nursing
 facilities under this section in the same manner as they apply to skilled
 nursing facilities under that section.'.
 (d) REPORT ON COVERAGE OF PEDIATRIC AND GERIATRIC ASSESSMENT UNIT SERVICES-
 The USHealth Board shall report to the Congress, by not later than March
 1, 1994, on whether or not coverage should be provided under the USHealth
 Program for the services of pediatric and geriatric assessment units.
 (e) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- (1) Sections 1832, 1833, and 1834 of the Social
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395k, 1395l, 1395m) are repealed.
 (2) Section 1861(e) of such Act is amended--
 (A) by striking the parenthetical clause before paragraph (1), and
 (B) by striking the second, third, and fourth sentences.
 (3) Section 1861(u) of such Act is amended by inserting `nursing facility
 (as defined in section 1819A(a)),' after `skilled nursing facility,'.
 (4) Section 1861(z) of such Act is amended by striking `or home health
 agency' and inserting `home health agency, or long-term care management
 agency'.
 (5) Section 1861(dd)(2)(A)(ii) of such Act is amended by striking `section
 1812(d)' and inserting `section 1812(b)'.
 (6) Section 1863 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395z) is amended by striking
 `or by ambulatory surgical centers under section 1832(a)(2)(F)(i)'.
 (7) Section 1864(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395aa(a)) is amended by striking
 `or whether an ambulatory surgical center meets the standards specified
 under section 1832(a)(2)(F)(i)' and inserting `or whether a facility is
 a nursing facility (as defined in section 1819A(a)'.
 (8) Sections 1864(a), 1902(a)(9)(C), and 1915(a)(1)(B)(ii)(I) of such Act
 (42 U.S.C. 1395aa(a), 1396a(a)(9)(C), 1396n(a)(1)(B)(ii)(I)) are each
 amended by striking `paragraphs (12) and (13)' and inserting `paragraphs
 (24) and (25)'.
 (9) Section 1865(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395bb(a)) is amended by striking
 `1832(a)(2)(F)(i),'.
 (10) Section 1882 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ss) is repealed.
SEC. 1202. CHANGES IN EXCLUSIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1862(a) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395y(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) by striking `and' at the end of subparagraph (F),
 (B) by striking the semicolon at the end of subparagraph (G) and inserting
 a comma, and
 (C) by adding after subparagraph (G) the following new subparagraphs:
 `(H) in the case of routine physical checkups, health screening,
 immunizations, health risk reduction, and other preventive health care
 services recognized as cost-effective by the USHealth Board, which are
 not reasonable and necessary for the diagnosis or prevention of illness
 or injury, and
 `(I) in the case of long-term care, which is not reasonable and necessary
 (i) for the care and management of chronic illness, (ii) to assist with
 activities of daily living, or (iii) to prevent institutionalization;';
 (2) in paragraph (6), by inserting `and except, in the case of long-term
 care, as is otherwise permitted under paragraph (1)(H)' after `paragraph
 (1)(G)';
 (3) by striking paragraphs (7) and (8) (relating to exclusion of physical
 examinations and eye examinations and eyeglasses and to orthopedic shoes);
 (4) in paragraph (9), by inserting `in the case of long-term care services
 and' after `except'; and
 (5) by striking paragraph (12) and inserting the following:
 `(12) for any individual who is an inmate of a public institution (except
 as a patient in a medical institution);'.
 (b) MAKING MEDICARE PRIMARY PAYOR- Section 1862(b) of such Act is amended--
 (1) by striking paragraphs (2) and (3), and
 (2) in paragraph (1), by striking `(b)(1)' and inserting `(b)'.
 (c) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Chapter 47 of subtitle D of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986 is repealed and the item in the table of chapters of such
 subtitle relating to such chapter is repealed.
SEC. 1203. STANDARDS FOR CERTIFICATION OF CERTAIN SERVICES.
 (a) EXTENDED CARE SERVICES- Section 1814(a)(2)(B) of the Social Security
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395f(a)(2)(B)) is amended by striking `skilled' before
 `nursing care' `nursing personnel', and `rehabilitation services'.
 (b) LONG-TERM CARE- Section 1814(a) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395f(a)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (6),
 (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (7) and inserting a
 semicolon, and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (7) the following new paragraph:
 `(8) in the case of long-term care provided to an individual--
 `(A) a long-term care management agency certifies (and recertifies,
 where such care is furnished over a period of time, such frequency as
 may be provided in regulations) that the individual is a chronically ill
 individual, and
 `(B) with respect to other than care management services, the care
 is approved by the agency furnishing care management services to the
 individual;'.
 (c) MEDICAL AND OTHER HEALTH SERVICES- Section 1814(a) of such Act is
 further amended by inserting after paragraph (8) the following:
 `(9) in the case of comprehensive outpatient rehabilitation facility
 services, (A) such services are or were required because the individual
 needed skilled rehabilitation services, (B) a plan for furnishing such
 services has been established and is periodically reviewed by a physician,
 and (C) such services are or were furnished while the individual is or
 was under the care of a physician;
 `(10) in the case of outpatient physicial therapy services, (A) such services
 are or were required because the individual needed physical therapy services,
 (B) a plan for furnishing such services has been established by a physician
 or by the qualified physical therapist providing such services and is
 periodically reviewed by a physician, and (C) such services are or were
 furnished while the individual is or was under the care of a physician;
 `(11) in the case of outpatient speech pathology services, (A) such services
 are or were required because the individual needed speech pathology services,
 (B) a plan for furnishing such services has been established by a physician
 or by the qualified speech pathologist providing such services and is
 periodically reviewed by a physician, and (C) such services are or were
 furnished while the individual is or was under the care of a physician; and
 `(12) in the case of medical and other health services (except services
 described in subparagraph (B), (C), (D), (E), or (F) of section 1861(s)(2)),
 such services are or were medically required.
With respect to items described in section 1861(s)(18), the certification
requirements of paragraph (11) shall be satisfied by the physician's
prescription.'.
 (d) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- (1) Section 1835 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395n)
 is repealed.
 (2) Section 1861(u) of such Act (42 U.S.C 1395x(u)) is amended by striking
 `and section 1835(e)'.
 (3) Section 1880(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395qq(a)) is amended by striking
 `sections 1814(c) and 1835(d)' and inserting `section 1814(c)'.
SEC. 1204. DEVELOPMENT OF MEDICAL CARE ACCESS FACILITIES.
 (a) USE OF RURAL HEALTH CARE TRANSITION FUNDS- Amounts authorized to be
 appropriated under section 4005(e) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
 Act of 1987 (relating to grant program for rural health care transition)
 shall be available for grants for the development of facilities as medical
 care access facilities (as defined for purposes of title XVIII of the
 Social Security Act).
 (b) ADDITIONAL DEVELOPMENT GRANT-
 (1) From the amounts appropriated pursuant to paragraph (2), the Secretary
 of Health and Human Services is authorized to provide grants, of up to
 $200,000 with respect to facility--
 (A) to create a medical care access facility in a community without a
 hospital, but with a documented need for such a facility, or
 (B) to assist a hospital in being restructured to become such a facility.
 (2) There are authorized to be appropriated, from the Federal Hospital
 Insurance Trust Fund for grants under paragraph (1), $30,000,000 for fiscal
 year 1990, $40,000,000 for fiscal year 1991, and $45,000,000 for fiscal
 year 1992.
 (c) TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS RELATING TO TREATMENT OF MEDICARE CARE ACCESS
 FACILITY AS PROVIDER OF SERVICES- (1) Section 1861(u) of the Social
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(u)) is amended by inserting `medical care
 access facility,' after `hospital,'.
 (2) Section 1861(w)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(w)(1)) is amended by
 inserting `medical care access facility,' after `hospital,'.
 (3) Section 1863 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395z) is amended by striking `and
 (dd)(2)' and inserting `(dd)(2), and (mm)'.
 (4) Section 1864(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395aa(a)) is amended, in the
 first and second sentences, by inserting `, medical care access facility,'
 after `hospital'.
 (5) Section 1865(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395bb(a)) is amended by striking
 `or 1861(dd)(2)' and inserting `1861(dd)(2), or 1861(mm)'.
 (6) Section 1861(s)(2)(K)(i) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(s)(2)(K)(i))
 is amended by inserting `medical care access facility,' after `hospital,'.
SEC. 1205. RURAL HEALTH CLINIC DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.
 The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall provide, effective January
 1, 1990, for a medicare rural health clinic demonstration program under
 which the provisions of the Social Security Act would be waived to the
 extent necessary to provide for the following:
 (1) Either--
 (A) payment for primary care procedures included in rural health clinic
 services would be paid on the basis of a fee schedule, which adjusts
 the amounts paid for such services based on the relative value of the
 professional services, such fee schedule being adjusted through an index
 that takes into account the higher overhead costs, etc., associated with
 rural health clinic services; or
 (B) payment for rural health clinic services would be paid under new methods
 relating to the reasonable cost of providing rural health clinic services.
 (2) Coverage would be provided for early detection procedures, health
 education, and health risk reduction services.
 (3) Rural health clinics would not be required to have more than 40
 percent of the clinic time covered by physician assistants or nurse
 practitioners. This minimum may be waived, subject to annual review by the
 Secretary, if a clinic demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary
 that the clinic has been unable, despite diligent efforts, to recruit such
 assistants or practitioners.
 (4) Physician, physician assistant, and nurse practitioner productivity
 standards could be reduced for low population density areas below the
 standards otherwise applicable.
SEC. 1206. RURAL AND CENTRAL CITY HEALTH CARE RESEARCH AND DEMONSTRATIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Administrator of the Health Care Financing Administration
 shall provide for additional research and demonstration projects into how
 the medicare and medicaid programs could be changed to better cover care
 for beneficiaries residing in rural areas and in central city areas of
 large cities.
 (b) ANNUAL REPORT- The Administrator shall report to Congress by not later
 than April 1 of each year (beginning with 1992) concerning the progress
 of the research and demonstration projects conducted under this section.
 (c) APPLICATION OF WAIVER PROVISIONS- The provisions of section 402(a)(2)
 of the Social Security Amendments of 1967 shall apply to demonstration
 projects conducted under this section in the same manner as they apply to
 demonstration projects conducted under section 402(a)(1) of such Act.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- This section shall take effect on October 1, 1990.
SEC. 1207. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
 (a) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS RELATING TO LONG-TERM CARE- (1) Section 1861(o)(1)
 (42 U.S.C. 1395x(o)(1)) is amended by inserting `and provides long-term
 care' before the semicolon.
 (2) Section 1861(u) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(u)) is amended by inserting
 `long-term care management agency,' after `home health agency,'.
 (3) Section 1121(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a(a)) is amended by inserting
 `long-term care management agencies,' after `home health agencies,'.
 (b) COORDINATION OF LONG-TERM CARE AND ACUTE HOME CARE SERVICES- The USHealth
 Board, in consultation with the National Council on Quality Assurance,
 shall develop policies and protocols to assure the appropriate coordination
 in payments, and identification of benefits, for long-term care and acute
 health care services under title XVIII of the Social Security Act. Such
 coordination shall assure that long-term care benefits supplement acute
 care benefits and that receipt of long-term care, by itself, is not taken
 into account in determining coverage and benefits for acute health care
 services under such title.
TITLE III--PAYMENTS FOR SERVICES
SEC. 1301. LIMITING RATE OF INCREASE OF ALL PAYMENT AMOUNTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Title XVIII of the Social Security Act, as previously
 amended, is amended by inserting after section 1886 the following new
 section:
`DETERMINATION OF APPLICABLE PERCENTAGE CHANGE IN PAYMENT RATES
 `SEC. 1887. (a) IN GENERAL- With respect to any payment period (after
 the base period) and subject to the remaining provisions of this section,
 the `applicable percentage change' is the percentage increase or decrease
 in the per capita gross national product (as defined in subsection (d))
 projected by the USHealth Board for that period (with adjustments for
 previous under-estimations and over-estimations of such an increase or
 decrease for previous payment periods after the base period).
 `(b) ADJUSTMENTS- (1) Subject to paragraph (2), in determining the applicable
 percentage change with respect to any class of health care services,
 the USHealth Board shall adjust the applicable percentage change so that
 (subject to subsection (c)) the total of the payments per capita under this
 title for that class of services for the subsequent payment period is equal
 to the payments per capita under this title for that class of services for
 the previous payment period adjusted by the applicable percentage change
 described in subsection (a).
 `(2) If there is a shift in utilization away from one class of health
 care services to another class of health care services, the USHealth Board
 is authorized to provide for a decrease in the total of the payments per
 capita under this title for the former class of services and an increase
 in the total of the payments per capita under this title for the latter
 class of services to reflect the relative shift.
 `(c) CEILING ON AGGREGATE EXPENDITURES AT 12 PERCENT OF GNP- Notwithstanding
 the previous provisions of this section, the applicable percentage change
 shall be adjusted by the USHealth Board to the extent necessary to ensure
 that, on average over any three fiscal-year period, the aggregate of the
 expenditures under this title does not exceed 12 percent of the gross
 national product of the United States during the corresponding period.
 `(d) CEILING ON LONG-TERM CARE EXPENDITURES AT 1.1 PERCENT OF GNP-
 Notwithstanding the previous provisions of this section, the amount
 of payments for long-term care or the maximum monthly benefit for
 non-institutional long-term care, or both, shall be adjusted by the USHealth
 Board to the extent necessary to ensure that, on average over any three
 fiscal-year period, the aggregate of the long-term care expenditures under
 this title does not exceed 1.1 percent of the gross national product of the
 United States during the corresponding period; except that such percent
 shall be adjusted by the Board to reflect changes in the proportion of
 the population of the United States that requires long-term care and to
 reflect the changes in the severity of need for such care by such population.
 `(e) COMPUTATION OF PER CAPITA GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT CHANGES- (1) In
 subsection (a), the term `percentage increase or decrease in per capita
 gross national product' means, with respect to a payment period, one-third
 of the percentage increase or decrease in the per capita gross national
 product (as defined in paragraph (2)) over the 12-quarter period ending
 with the last calendar quarter before the beginning of the payment period.
 `(2) In paragraph (1), the term `per capita gross national product' means,
 for a quarter--
 `(A) the gross national product of the United States for that quarter,
 divided by
 `(B) the population of the United States in that quarter, as determined in
 accordance with data contained in the monthly Economic Indicators (issued
 by the Joint Economic Committee) for the second month of that quarter.
 `(f) DEFINITIONS- In this section:
 `(1) PAYMENT PERIOD- The term `payment period' refers--
 `(A) with respect to payment under section 1886(b), to the 12-month cost
 reporting periods beginning during a fiscal year,
 `(B) with respect to payment under section 1886(d), to discharges occurring
 during a fiscal year, and
 `(C) with respect to other payments, to services furnished during a
 calendar year.
 `(2) BASE PERIOD- The term `base period' means the payment period that
 begins in 1994.'.
 (b) PAYMENT LIMIT FOR LONG-TERM CARE AND OTHER AUTHORIZED NONINSTITUTIONAL
 CARE- Section 1814 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395f) is amended by adding at
 the end the following new subsection:
`Limit on Payment
 `(l)(1) Subject to section 1887, the maximum amount of payment that may
 be made with respect to noninstitutional care provided a chronically-ill
 individual residing in a State in a month is an amount that the Secretary
 estimates is equal to the product of (A) 95 percent of the average of (i)
 the average per diem amount payable under this title for extended care
 services furnished during the month in the State and (ii) the average per
 diem amount payable under this title for extended care services furnished
 during the month in the United States, and (B) the number of days in the
 month over which the individual is provided such care.
 `(2) Each long-term care management agency shall determine the service
 mix and volume for chronically-ill individuals whose care it manages. In
 determining such mix and volume, the agency shall provide that the total
 aggregate service expenditures for these individuals is within expenditure
 ceilings set by the USHealth Board, taking into account differing levels
 of disabilities of these individuals.'.
SEC. 1302. PAYMENTS FOR INPATIENT HOSPITAL SERVICES.
 (a) CHANGES TIED TO CHANGES IN PER CAPITA GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT- Section
 1886 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C 1395ww) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in paragraph (3)(A), by striking `increased by the applicable percentage
 increase under subparagraph (B)' and inserting `adjusted by the applicable
 percentage change determined under section 1887', and
 (B) by striking subparagraph (B) of paragraph (3);
 (2) in subsections (d)(3)(A) and (d)(9)(C)(i), by striking `adjusted for
 subsequent fiscal years in accordance with the final determination of
 the Secretary under subsection (e)(4)' and inserting `adjusted for fiscal
 year 1994 and subsequent fiscal years by the applicable percentage change
 (as determined under section 1887) for that fiscal year; and
 (3) in subsection (e)--
 (A) in paragraph (2), by striking the second and third sentences, and
 (B) by striking paragraphs (3), (4), and (5).
 (b) PAYMENT FOR CAPITAL-RELATED COSTS- (1) Paragraph (1) of section 1886(g)
 of such Act is amended to read as follows:
 `(1)(A) Notwithstanding section 1814(b), the amount of the payment with
 respect to the capital-related costs of inpatient hospital services of
 a subsection (d) hospital for inpatient hospital discharges in a cost
 reporting period or in a fiscal year is equal to the product of--
 `(i) the amount of the payment with respect to the operating costs of
 inpatient hospital services provided under paragraph (1), and
 `(ii) the capital ratio for that diagnosis-related group, established
 under subparagraph (B).
 `(B)(i) For each diagnosis-related group established under subsection
 (d)(4), the USHealth Board shall assign an appropriate capital ratio factor
 which reflects the relative hospital capital resources used with respect to
 discharges classified within that group compared to discharges classified
 within other groups.
 `(ii) These capital ratios shall be adjusted at the same frequency as the
 weighting factors are adjusted under subsection (d)(4)(C).
 `(iii) The mean of these capital ratios for discharges in a fiscal year
 may not exceed the mean of such capital ratios for discharges occurring
 during the 3-fiscal-year period ending with fiscal year 1988.'.
 (2) Paragraph (3) of such section is repealed.
 (c) ADJUSTMENT IN PAYMENT AMOUNTS TO TAKE INTO ACCOUNT SEVERITY- (1)
 Section 1886(b) of such Act is amended by adding at the end the following
 new paragraph:
 `(7) The USHealth Board may provide for such adjustment in the amount of
 payment under this subsection as may be necessary to ensure reasonable
 availability of inpatient hospital services in rural areas, central city
 areas, and with respect to other impacted areas or populations.'.
 (2) Section 1886(d) of such Act is amended by adding at the end the
 following new paragraph:
 `(10)(A) The USHealth Board shall provide for such adjustment in the amount
 of payment made under this subsection as may be necessary to adjust to
 reflect the relative complexity and severity of care provided to patients
 classified within the different diagnosis-related groups.
 `(B) The USHealth Board may provide for such adjustment in the amount of
 payment under this subsection as may be necessary to ensure reasonable
 availability of inpatient hospital services in rural areas, central city
 areas, and with respect to other impacted areas or populations.'.
 (d) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- (1) Sections 1122, 1134, and 1135 of such Act
 (42 U.S.C. 1320a-1, 1320b-4, 1320b-5) are repealed.
 (2)(A) Section 1861 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x) is amended by striking
 subsection (v).
 (B) Section 1861(z)(2) of such Act is amended--
 (i) in subparagraph (A), by striking `(or such lesser amount as may be
 established by the State under section 1122(g)(1) in which the hospital
 is located)' and by striking `(2)(A)' and inserting `(2)', and
 (ii) by striking subparagraph (B).
 (C) Section 1866(a)(1)(D) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395cc(a)(1)(D)) is
 amended by adding at the end the following: `and to make reports to the
 Secretary of information described in section 1121(a) in accordance with
 the uniform reporting system (established under such section) for that
 type of provider,'.
 (3) Section 1876(g)(4) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395mm(g)(4)) is amended by
 striking `for the reasonable cost (as determined under section 1861(v)) or'.
 (4) Section 1878 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395oo) is repealed.
 (5) Section 1884(c) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395uu(c)) is amended by striking
 paragraph (4).
 (e) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 payments for hospital cost reporting periods beginning, and for discharges
 occurring, on or after January 1, 1994.
SEC. 1303. PAYMENTS FOR OTHER SERVICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1814 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395f)
 is amended--
 (1) by amending subsection (b) to read as follows:
`Payment for Services
 `(b)(1) Subject to the provisions of subsection (g), the USHealth Board
 shall establish, for each class of health care services for which payment
 may be made under this title (except as provided under section 1886)
 a schedule of payment amounts for those services.
 `(2)(A) For each class of such services the USHealth Board, after
 consultation with persons furnishing those services, shall establish
 a payment schedule which shall apply to services furnished during the
 calendar year beginning on or after January 1, 1994. Such schedule may be
 based on the relative cost or value associated with the furnishing of the
 services or other similar methods recognized by the Board.
 `(B) For services furnished in each subsequent calendar year, the Board
 shall update each of the payment schedules established under this section
 by the applicable adjustment change for that calendar year for that class
 of services (as established under section 1887).
 `(3)(A) The Board shall adjust the payment schedule applicable to services
 furnished in local areas to take into account the differences in the prices
 of items (such as electricity, rent, or costs of malpractice insurance)
 which compose elements of the costs of furnishing the services.
 `(B) The Board may also adjust the payment schedule applicable to services
 to take into account differences in the patient population to which the
 services are furnished.
 `(C) The Board may also increase the payment schedule applicable to the
 provision of a service in order to reward outstanding or higher quality
 in the provision of that service than in the provision of similar services
 by that provider or by other providers.
 `(D) The USHealth Board may provide for such adjustment in the amount of
 payment under this section with respect to a class of services furnished in
 an area (including a rural area or central city area) as may be necessary
 to ensure reasonable availability of such services in such area, and to
 impacted populations within the area.
 `(4)(A) The USHealth Board, in determining the reasonable charges or other
 payment rates for physicians' services and other professional services
 furnished under this title shall--
 `(i) establish such charges or rates to use an index that reflects the
 particular costs of furnishing such services, and
 `(ii) permit an adjustment of such charges or rates for services furnished
 in rural areas to take into account the 24-hour on-call coverage and low
 volume of services associated with the provision of professional services
 in such areas.
 `(B) The changes under subparagraph (A) shall be made in consultation
 with primary care providers and consumers and in a manner designed to
 remove inappropriate differentials in payment rates between health care
 practitioners located in urban and rural areas and to provide a reasonable
 incentive to practice in rural areas.';
 (2) in subsection (c), by striking `(except under subsection (d) or
 subsection (h))';
 (3) by amending subsection (d) to read as follows:
`Use of State Alternative Reimbursement Systems
 `(d)(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this title (including section
 1886), the USHealth Board may provide for payment for one or more classes
 of health care services furnished under this title (including inpatient
 hospital services) under an alternative reimbursement system established
 by a State for those classes of services if the Board determines that--
 `(A) with respect to the class of services, the total amount of payments
 to be made will not exceed the amount of payments that would otherwise be
 made under this title,
 `(B) the reimbursement system would not adversely affect the quality of
 services, or access to services, under this title, and
 `(C) the reimbursement system equitably treats all providers covered under
 the system.
 `(2) The USHealth Board shall make available to each State, upon the request
 of the State and from the USHealth Program Trust Fund, a one-time grant
 of not less than $1,000,000, and not more than $3,000,000, to provide for
 the initial development of alternative reimbursement systems described in
 paragraph (1).
 `(3) If the USHealth Board determines that, as a result of use of an
 alternative reimbursement system under paragraph (1), the amount of the
 payments made with respect to services furnished in a State are less than
 the amounts that would have been made under this title in the absence of
 the system, the Board shall provide for a reduction, by 50 percent of the
 amount of the savings, of the amount that the State is otherwise obligated
 to pay under section 1820 (as inserted by section 1406 of the USHealth
 Program Act).';
 (4) by striking subsection (e) and inserting the following new subsections:
 `(e) The USHealth Board shall provide for a toll-free, telephone hotline to
 handle inquiries concerning payment for services of certified registered
 nurse specialists, certified nurse-midwives, nurse practitioners, and
 clinical nurse specialists under this title.';
 (5) in subsection (f)--
 (A) in paragraphs (1), (2), and (4), by striking `hospital insurance
 benefits under section 226' and inserting `benefits under this title', and
 (B) in paragraph (4), by striking `which would be payable under subsection
 (d)(3)' and inserting `which is determined by the USHealth Board';
 (6) by striking subsection (g) and inserting the following new subsection:
`Payments for Health Care Services of Medical Care Access Facilities
 `(g)(1)(A) The amount paid to a medical care access facility with respect
 to inpatient care for which payment may be made under this title shall
 be an amount equal to the payment amount that would be established under
 section 1886(d) if such care were deemed to be inpatient hospital services
 provided by a subsection (d) hospital, subject to an adjustment to reflect
 the relative costs (including overhead costs and stand-by capability) that
 medical care access facilities have of doing business compared to hospitals.
 `(B) In the case of an individual who receives inpatient hospital services
 after receiving inpatient care in a medical access care facility, the
 payment otherwise provided under section 1886 shall be reduced by such
 amount as is necessary to reflect the payments made for the inpatient
 care under this subsection. The Secretary shall periodically review the
 allocation of payments for inpatient services between medical care access
 facilities and hospitals under this subparagraph.
 `(2) The amount of payments for health services (other than inpatient care)
 provided in a medical care access facility under this title shall be the
 amounts determined by the USHealth Board as follows:
 `(A) With respect to each emergency visit, the payment amount shall be an
 amount equal to the sum of--
 `(i) a professional component (established under a prospective payment system
 which is established by the Board and which takes into account the relative
 value of the services furnished compared to other professional services), and
 `(ii) a facility-related component, which takes into account the costs
 that are reasonable and related to facility overhead costs and similar
 and related costs of facilities for such a visit.
 `(B) With respect to another visit, the payment amount shall be an amount
 established under a prospective payment system established by the USHealth
 Board and taking into account the relative value of the services furnished
 compared to other professional services.'; and
 (7) by striking subsections (h), (i), (j), and (k).
 (b) REDESIGNATION- Sections 1845 and 1847 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395w-1,
 1395w-3) are redesignated as sections 1821 and 1822, respectively, and
 are transferred and inserted after section 1820 of such Act (as inserted
 by section 1406 of this subdivision).
 (c) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- (1) Sections 1134, 1135, 1887, and 1888 of such
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1320b-4, 1320b-5, 1395xx, 1395zz) are repealed.
 (2) Section 1881(b) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395rr(b)) is amended by striking
 paragraphs (2) through (7) and (11).
 (3) Section 1883(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395tt(a)) is amended by amending
 paragraph (2) to read as follows:
 `(2) Payment to any hospital for services furnished under an agreement
 entered into under this section shall be established by the USHealth Board
 and be based upon the payment amounts for routine services for extended
 care services in the area in which the hospital is located and upon the
 payment amounts associated with ancillary services associated with inpatient
 hospital services.'.
SEC. 1304. DIRECT PAYMENT FOR ALL SERVICES AND USE OF CARRIERS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1814 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395f)
 is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
`Direct Payment for Services
 `(h) No payment may be made under this title for the furnishing of services
 to an individual by an entity, unless the entity agrees to the terms and
 conditions of a participation agreement (established by the Board) which
 prohibits the entity from charging the individual or any other person for
 services for which payment may be made under this title.'.
 (b) USE OF INTERMEDIARIES AND CARRIERS- (1) Section 1816 of such Act
 (42 U.S.C. 1395h) is repealed.
 (2) Section 1842 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395u)--
 (A) is amended as follows:
 (i) by striking `part' each place it appears and inserting `title',
 (ii) in subsection (a)--
 (I) by striking `and with a view' and all that follows through `part A
 and under this part',
 (II) by striking `is authorized to' and inserting `shall, to the maximum
 extent possible,',
 (III) by striking `, including carriers with which agreements under section
 1816 are in effect,',
 (IV) in paragraph (1)(A), by striking `on a reasonable cost or reasonable
 charge basis (as may be applicable)', and
 (V) by adding at the end the following: `To the maximum extent practicable
 and consistent with the other requirements of this section, the USHealth
 Board shall use insurance companies as carriers under this section, and
 shall take appropriate steps to strengthen utilization review by carriers
 under this section to better control cost increases due to changes in
 billing practices, service delivery, and service intensity.';
 (iii) in subsection (b)(3)--
 (I) by striking subparagraphs (A), (B), (F), (G), and (H),
 (II) by inserting `and' at the end of subparagraph (D),
 (III) by redesignating subparagraphs (C) through (E) as subparagraphs (A)
 through (C), and
 (IV) by striking all that follows the first sentence;
 (iv) in subsection (b)--
 (I) by striking paragraph (4) and paragraphs (6) through (12), and
 (II) by redesignating paragraph (5) as paragraph (4);
 (v) in subsection (f)--
 (I) by striking `-- (1)',
 (II) by striking `; and' and inserting a period, and
 (III) by striking paragraph (2); and
 (vi) by striking subsections (g) through (o);
 (B) is redesignated as section 1816, and
 (C) is transferred and inserted in part A of title XVIII of such Act after
 section 1815.
 (c) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- (1)(A) Section 1128A(a)(2) of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 1320a-7a) is amended by striking `(A)' and all that follows through
 `1842(h)(1)' and inserting `section 1814(f)'.
 (B) Section 1153(d)(4) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1320c-2(d)(4)) is amended by
 striking `an intermediary' and all that follows through `1842' and inserting
 `carrier having a contract under section 1816'.
 (2) Section 1861(aa)(2) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(aa)(2)) is amended by
 striking clause (ii) and redesignating clauses (iii) and (iv) as clauses
 (ii) and (iii), respectively.
 (3) Section 1866(a)(2) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395cc(a)(2)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by inserting `and' at the end of subparagraph (L),
 by striking `, and' at the end of subparagraph (M) and inserting a period,
 and by striking subparagraph (N), and
 (2) in paragraph (2), by striking subparagraphs (A) and (C).
 (4) Section 1876 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395mm) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a)(3), by striking `sections 1814(b) and 1833(a)'
 and inserting `section 1814',
 (B) in subsection (a)(4), by striking `sections 1816 and 1842' and inserting
 `section 1816', and
 (C) in subsection (g)(6)(A), by striking `section 1816(c)(2) and 1842(c)(2)'
 and inserting `section 1842(c)(2)'.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATES- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 items and services furnished on or after January 1, 1994.
SEC. 1305. CHANGES IN HMO COVERAGE AND PAYMENT.
 (a) INCREASING PAYMENT TO 100 Percent of AAPCC-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Subsection (a)(1)(C) of section 1876 of the Social Security
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395mm) is amended by striking `95 percent' and inserting
 `100 percent'.
 (2) POTENTIAL ADJUSTMENT IN RATE OF INCREASE WHERE INADEQUATE DATA-
 Such subsection is further amended by adding at the end the following:
 `If the USHealth Board determines that there is no longer sufficient data
 to adequately compute such an adjusted average per capita cost for a class,
 the Board shall estimate such an amount in a manner that is consistent
 with the weighted average of the adjusted average per capita costs for all
 the classes changing at the same rate as the applicable adjustment change
 described in section 1887.'.
 (b) ADJUSTMENT OF AAPCC BY HEALTH STATUS AND OTHER ENROLLEE FACTORS-
 Subsection (a)(1)(B) of such section is amended by striking `age, disability
 status, and such other factors' and inserting `age, sex, disability status,
 enrollee type, and other factors relating to health status'.
 (c) RESTRICTING COVERAGE TO QUALIFIED HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS-
 Subsection (b) of such section is amended by striking `which--' and all
 that follows through the end and inserting `which is a qualified health
 maintenance organization (as defined in section 1310(d) of the Public
 Health Service Act).'.
 (d) REQUIRING COVERAGE OF ALL SERVICES- Such section is further amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1)(A)--
 (A) by striking `-- (i)', and
 (B) by striking `, and (ii)' and all that follows through `part B only';
 (2) in subsection (a)(4), by striking `, or part B only' each place
 it appears;
 (3) in subsection (c)(2), by striking the dash and all that follows through
 `only under such part,' and inserting `only those services covered under
 parts A and B of this title';
 (4) in subsection (d), by striking `or enrolled under part B only';
 (5) in subsection (e)(1)--
 (A) by striking `-- (A)',
 (B) by striking ` or (B)' and all that follows through `and enrolled under
 part B only', and
 (C) by striking ` or enrolled under part B only, respectively,'; and
 (6) in subsection (g)(2)--
 (A) by striking `-- (A)',
 (B) by striking `, or (B)' and all that follows through `benefits under
 part B only',
 (C) by striking `or enrolled in part B only, respectively,' each place
 it appears.
 (e) CAMPAIGN TO ENCOURAGE USE OF HMOS AND PROVISION OF SIDE-BY-SIDE
 COMPARISONS- Such section is further amended by adding at the end the
 following new subsection:
 `(j)(1) The USHealth Board shall conduct a national campaign to encourage
 eligible individuals to elect to enroll with eligible organizations under
 this section.
 `(2) The USHealth Board shall make available, to eligible individuals,
 in each geographic region in which eligible organizations offer enrollment
 under this section, a brochure that compares the benefits available through
 such organizations under this section (including information on covered
 services, beneficiary cost and other factors affecting the quality of
 or access to health care services) with the benefits otherwise available
 under this title.'.
 (f) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- Such section is further amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1)(A), by striking `and the term `reasonable' and
 all that follows through `subsection (h)',
 (2) by striking paragraph (2) of subsection (a), and
 (3) by striking subsections (f) and (h).
 (g) EFFECTIVE DATES- (1) The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply
 to payments for months beginning with January 1994.
 (2) The amendments made by subsections (c), (d), and (f) apply to contracts
 entered into or renewed on or after January 1, 1994.
 (3) The amendment made by subsection (e) shall take effect on January
 1, 1994.
TITLE IV--FINANCING PROGRAM
SEC. 1401. LIMITED COINSURANCE AND COPAYMENTS WITH PROTECTION AGAINST
CATASTROPHIC EXPENSES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1813 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395e)
 is amended to read as follows:
`COPAYMENTS AND COINSURANCE
 `SEC. 1813. (a) REQUIREMENT- Subject to subsection (b), each enrolled
 beneficiary is liable to pay to the USHealth Program Trust Fund, for
 covered services furnished under this title during a calendar year--
 `(1) for the first $100 of payment amounts made for covered outpatient drugs;
 `(2) until the applicable limitations under subsection (b) have been
 reached--
 `(A) 20 percent of the amount of the remaining payments made for services
 (other than services described in subparagraph (B)), and
 `(B) 25 percent of the amount of the payments made for long-term care; and
 `(3) after such a limitation has been reached but subject to subsection
 (c), nominal copayments (as specified by the USHealth Board).
 `(b) LIMITATION ON OUT-OF-POCKET LIABILITIES-
 `(1) ANNUAL LIMIT- The maximum amount of payments that a beneficiary
 is liable under paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (a), for services
 furnished during a calendar year, under--
 `(A) subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2)(A), is $600, and
 `(B) subsection (a)(2)(B), is $1,000.
 `(2) INCOME-RELATED MAXIMUM- A beneficiary may apply to the USHealth Board
 for a waiver of liability otherwise required under subsection (a), and the
 Board shall approve such a waiver if the Board determines that the amount
 of such coinsurance, for all the members of the beneficiary's family (as
 defined by the Board) in a calendar year would be greater than the amount
 by which (A) the family's income for the year, exceeds (B) the nonfarm
 official poverty line defined by the Office of Management and Budget (and
 revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget
 Reconciliation Act of 1981) applicable to a family of that size during
 that year.
 `(3) INDEXING OF PAYMENT AMOUNTS- The dollar amounts specified in paragraph
 (1) shall be modified by the Board (and rounded to the nearest dollar
 amount), for calendar years after 1994, to reflect changes in the per capita
 gross national product (as defined in section 1887(c)(2)) between the last
 quarter of 1991 and the last quarter of the year before the year concerned.
 `(c) NOMINAL COPAYMENTS- The nominal copayments described in subsection
 (a)(3) may not be imposed for--
 `(1) services furnished to individuals under 21 years of age,
 `(2) services furnished to pregnant women, if the services relate to
 the pregnancy or to any other medical condition which may complicate the
 pregnancy, or
 `(3) emergency services (as defined by the Board), family planning services
 and supplies, and services furnished by an eligible organization under
 section 1876.
 `(d) COLLECTION OF PAYMENTS- The USHealth Board, by regulation, shall
 provide procedures for the collection of payments required under this
 section. For procedures relating to collection of claims of the United
 States Government, see chapter 37 of title 31, United States Code.
 `(e) FAILURE TO MAKE PAYMENTS- Failure to make any payments required under
 this section shall not result in an individual's loss of entitlement to
 benefits under this title.
 `(f) NO DEDUCTION IN PROVIDER PAYMENTS- The fact that an individual is
 obligated to pay amounts under this section shall not result in any reduction
 in the amount of payment made under this title to any provider of services
 or other entity for services furnished under this title to the individual.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- (1) Section 1886 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ww)
 is amended--
 (A) in subsection (b)(1), by striking `but subject to the provisions of
 section 1813,', and
 (B) in subsections (d)(1)(A) and (d)(9)(A), by striking `but subject to
 the provisions of section 1813'.
SEC. 1402. EXTENSION OF HOSPITAL INSURANCE TAX TO ALL WAGES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 230 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 430)
 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(e) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, for purposes of determining
 wages and self-employment income under sections 1401(b), 3101(b), and 3111(b)
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, the `contribution and benefit base'
 with respect to remuneration paid in (and taxable years beginning in)
 any calendar year after 1989 shall be an unlimited dollar amount.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsection (a) apply to
 remuneration paid (and taxable years beginning) after December 31, 1989.
SEC. 1403. ELIMINATION OF PART B MEDICARE PREMIUM FOR DISABLED BENEFICIARIES
AND PHASE-OUT OF PART B MEDICARE PREMIUM FOR ELDERLY BENEFICIARIES.
 (a) AMOUNT OF PREMIUM- Section 1839 of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395r) is redesignated as section 1818, is transferred and inserted
 after section 1817, and is amended--
 (1) by striking subsections (a) through (f) and inserting the following:
 `(a) Except as provided in subsection (c), the monthly premium of each
 individual who is 65 years of age or older for benefits under this
 title for each month in a calendar year (beginning with 1994) is equal
 to the monthly premium otherwise applicable under this section (or, for
 months in 1994, otherwise applicable under subsection (a)(3) or (e) of
 section 1839) for months in the previous year increased by a percentage
 determined as follows: The USHealth Board shall determine, in September
 of each year (beginning with 1993), the primary insurance amount computed
 under section 215(a)(1), based upon average indexed monthly earnings of
 $900, that applied to individuals who became eligible for and entitled to
 old-age insurance benefits on November 1 of the year before the year of
 the determination. The Board shall increase the monthly premium rate by the
 same percentage by which that primary insurance amount is increased when,
 by reason of the law in effect at the time the determination is made,
 it is so computed to apply to those individuals for the following November 1.
 `(b) If any monthly premium determined under subsection (a) is not a multiple
 of 10 cents, such premium shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of 10
 cents.'; and
 (2) in subsection (g)--
 (A) by redesignating such subsection as subsection (c),
 (B) in paragraph (1)(A), by striking `and subsections (b) and (f)' and
 inserting `and subsection (h)', and
 (C) by striking paragraphs (2) and (3) and inserting the following:
 `(2) In the case of months in a year after 1993, sum of the catastrophic
 coverage monthly premium and the prescription drug monthly premium shall
 be equal to the sum of such premiums for the previous year increased by
 the same percentage increase that is provided for the monthly premium
 under subsection (a).'; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(d) Notwithstanding the previous provisions of this section--
 `(1) the amount of the monthly premium under this section shall be reduced
 to zero in the case of an individual if the income of the individual's
 family is less than the official poverty line defined by the Official of
 Management and Budget (and revised annually in accordance with section
 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981) applicable to a
 family of that size during that year; and
 `(2) the monthly premiums otherwise established under this section for
 months in a year (after 1999) shall be the following percentage of the
 monthly premiums otherwise established:
 `(A) For 2000, 80 percent.
 `(B) For 2001, 60 percent.
 `(C) For 2002, 40 percent.
 `(D) For 2003, 20 percent.
 `(E) For 2004 and each year thereafter, 0 percent.'.
 (b) LIMITING TO PAYMENT BY ELDERLY- Section 1840 of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395s) is amended--
 (1)(A) in subsections (a)(1), (b)(1), and (e), by inserting `is 65 years of
 age or older' after `In the case of an individual who' each place it appears,
 (B) in subsection (d), by inserting `who is 65 years of age or older and
 who' after `In the case of an individual';
 (2) in subsections (a), by striking `or 223' each place it appears;
 (3) in paragraph (1), by adding at the end the following new sentence:
 `Such regulations shall be prescribed only after consultation with the
 USHealth Board.';
 (4) in subsection (a)(2), by striking `or the Federal Disability Insurance
 Trust Fund';
 (5) in subsection (c), by striking `may' and inserting `shall';
 (6) by striking `this part' each place it appears and inserting `this title';
 (7) by amending subsections (g) and (h) to read as follows:
 `(g) In the case of an individual who is 65 years of age or older and who
 is entitled to benefits under this title, premiums shall be payable under
 this section for the period commencing with the later of the month in
 which the individual becomes 65 years of age or the first month in which
 the individual becomes so entitled.'; and
 (8) by being redesignated as section 1820 and being transferred and inserted
 after section 1819A.
 (c) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 1843 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395v)
 is repealed.
SEC. 1404. CHANGES IN MEDICARE SUPPLEMENTAL PREMIUM.
 (a) PHASE-DOWN IN RATES FOR SUPPLEMENTAL PREMIUM- Section 59B(e) of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to supplemental premium rate for
 years after 1993) is amended by striking all that follows `AFTER 1993-
 ' and inserting the following: `In the case of any taxable year beginning
 in a calendar year after 1993, the supplemental premium rate determined
 under this subsection shall be as follows:
`In the case of any
--The supplemental
 taxable year beginning in:
--premium rate is:
1994
--$42.00
1995
--$38.00
1996
--$34.00
1997
--$30.00
1998
--$26.00
1999
--$22.00
2000
--$18.00
2001
--$14.00
2002
--$10.00
2003
--$6.00
2004
--$2.00
2005 and thereafter
--0.00.'.
 (b) INDEXING LIMITATION ON SUPPLEMENTAL PREMIUM TO PER CAPITA GNP-
 Section 59B(c)(2) of such Code (relating to limitation on annual premium)
 is amended--
 (1) in subparagraph (B), by striking all that follows `shall not exceed'
 and inserting `shall be equal to the limitation in effect for the preceding
 calendar year increased by percentage increase in the per capita gross
 national product (as defined in section 1887(e)(2) of the Social Security
 Act) during the 4-quarter period ending with the second quarter of such
 preceding calendar year, and
 (2) by striking subparagraph (C).'.
 (c) CREDIT FOR PAYMENT OF TAX SURCHARGE- Section 59B(c)(2) of such Code
 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(4) CREDIT FOR PAYMENT OF TAX SURCHARGE- The amount of the annual premium
 determined under this subsection with respect to any individual for a
 taxable year shall be reduced (but not below zero) by the amount of the
 tax paid under section 60(a) in the case of the individual with respect
 to the taxable year.'.
SEC. 1405. EXCISE TAX ON WAGES AND SELF-EMPLOYMENT INCOME.
 (a) TAX ON EMPLOYERS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 3111 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating
 to rate of tax on employers) is amended by redesignating subsection (c)
 as subsection (d) and by inserting after subsection (b) the following
 new subsection:
 `(c) USHEALTH PROGRAM-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In addition to the taxes imposed by the preceding
 subsections of this section, there is hereby imposed on every employer
 an excise tax, with respect to having individuals in his employ, equal
 to the applicable percentage of wages (as defined in section 3121 (a) and
 (t)) paid by him with respect to employment (as defined in section 3121(b)).
 `(2) APPLICABLE PERCENTAGE- For purposes of paragraph (1)--
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `applicable percentage' means the percentage
 prescribed under subparagraph (B).
 `(B) DETERMINATION OF APPLICABLE PERCENTAGE-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- Not later than December 15, 1993, the USHealth Board shall
 prescribe the applicable percentage. The applicable percentage shall be
 the percentage determined by the Board to be equal to the base percentage
 for 1988 increased by the per capita GNP adjustment for the period 1988
 through 1994.
 `(ii) DETERMINATION OF BASE PERCENTAGE- For purposes of clause (i), the base
 percentage for 1988 is the percentage which the Board estimates would (if
 the tax imposed by this subsection had applied to wages paid during 1988
 and if the tax imposed by section 1401(c) had applied to taxable years
 beginning in 1988) have resulted in revenues from the taxes imposed by
 this subsection and section 1401(c) with respect to such wages and taxable
 years equal to the aggregate amount paid or incurred by employers during
 1988 to reimburse (through insurance or otherwise) employees or retired,
 former employees for expenses referred to in section 105(b) (relating to
 amounts expended for medical care).
 `(iii) PER CAPITA GNP ADJUSTMENT FOR THE PERIOD 1988 THROUGH 1994- For
 purposes of clause (i), the per capita GNP adjustment for the period 1988
 through 1994 is the percentage (if any) by which--
 `(I) the per capita GNP for the 3rd quarter of 1994, exceeds
 `(II) the per capita GNP for the 3rd quarter of 1988.
 `(iv) PER CAPITA GNP- For purposes of clause (iii), the per capita GNP
 for any quarter is an amount equal to--
 `(I) the gross national product of the United States for that quarter,
 divided by
 `(II) the population of the United States in that quarter, as determined in
 accordance with data contained in the monthly Economic Indicators (issued
 by the Joint Economic Committee) for the second month of that quarter.
 `(3) CONTRIBUTION AND BENEFIT BASE NOT TO APPLY- For purposes of the tax
 imposed by this subsection, section 3121(a) shall be applied without regard
 to paragraph (1) thereof.
 `(4) TAX TO BE PAID WITH RESPECT TO CERTAIN OTHERWISE EXEMPT EMPLOYMENT-
 For purposes of the tax imposed by this subsection, subsection (b) of
 section 3121 shall be applied without regard to paragraphs (5), (7), (8),
 (9), and (17) thereof.'
 (2) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by paragraph (1) shall apply to
 remuneration paid after December 31, 1993.
 (b) TAX ON SELF-EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 1401 of such Code (relating to rate of tax on
 self-employment income) is amended by redesignating subsections (c) and (d)
 as subsections (d) and (e), respectively, and by inserting after subsection
 (b) the following new subsection:
 `(c) USHEALTH PROGRAM-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In addition to the taxes imposed by the preceding
 subsections of this section, there is hereby imposed for each taxable
 year, on the self-employment income of every individual, a tax equal to
 the applicable percentage of the amount of the self-employment income for
 such taxable year.
 `(2) APPLICABLE PERCENTAGE- The applicable percentage for any taxable
 year shall be the applicable percentage determined under section 3111(c)
 for the calendar year in which such taxable year begins.
 `(3) CONTRIBUTION AND BENEFIT BASE NOT TO APPLY- For purposes of this
 subsection, self-employment income shall be determined without regard to
 clause (i) of section 1402(b)(1).'
 (2) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by paragraph (1) shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.
SEC. 1406. INCREASE IN FEDERAL EXCISE TAX ON CIGARETTES AND APPLICATION OF
INCREASE TO USHEALTH TRUST FUND.
 (a) INCREASE IN CIGARETTE TAXES- Section 5701 of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986 (relating to the imposition of tax on cigarettes) is amended--
 (1) by adding at the end of subsection (b) the following new paragraph:
 `(3) ADDITIONAL TAXES- In addition to the rates under paragraphs (1) and
 (2) and subject to subsection (f)--
 `(A) SMALL CIGARETTES- On cigarettes, weighing not more than 3 pounds per
 thousand, $4 per thousand.
 `(B) LARGE CIGARETTES- On cigarettes, weighing more than 3 pounds per
 thousand, $8.40; except that, if more than 6 1/2 inches in length, they
 shall be taxable at the rate prescribed for cigarettes weighing not more
 than 3 pounds per thousand, counting each 2 3/4 inches, or fraction thereof,
 of the length of each as one cigarette.'; and
 (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(f) ANNUAL ADJUSTMENTS IN RATE OF ADDITIONAL TAX ON CIGARETTES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In the case of cigarettes removed during a year after 1990,
 subsection (b)(3) shall be applied by increasing or decreasing each dollar
 amount contained therein (as previously adjusted under this subsection) by
 the percentage increase or decrease in per capita gross national product
 for the payment period that is such year (as defined in section 1887(d)
 of the Social Security Act).
 `(2) ROUNDING- Any adjustment under paragraph (1) shall be rounded to the
 nearest cent (or if such adjustment results in a dollar amount that is
 a multiple of 1/2 cent, such adjustment shall be increased to the next
 highest multiple of 1 cent).'
 (b) FLOOR STOCKS-
 (1) IMPOSITION OF TAX- On cigarettes manufactured in or imported into the
 United States which are removed before January 1, 1990, and held on such
 date for sale by any person, there shall be imposed the following taxes:
 (A) SMALL CIGARETTES- On cigarettes, weighing not more than 3 pounds per
 thousand, $4 per thousand; and
 (B) LARGE CIGARETTES- On cigarettes, weighing more than 3 pounds per
 thousand, $8.40 per thousand; except that, if more than 6 1/2 inches
 in length, they shall be taxable at the rate prescribed for cigarettes
 weighing not more than 3 pounds per thousand, counting each 2 3/4 inches,
 or fraction thereof, of the length of each as one cigarette.
 (2) Liability for tax and method of payment-
 (A) LIABILITY FOR TAX- A person holding cigarettes on January 1, 1990, to
 which any tax imposed by paragraph (1) applies shall be liable for such tax.
 (B) METHOD OF PAYMENT- The tax imposed by paragraph (1) shall be treated
 as a tax imposed under section 5701 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986
 and shall be due and payable on January 1, 1994, in the same manner as
 the tax imposed under such section is payable with respect to cigarettes
 removed on January 1, 1990.
 (3) CIGARETTE- For purposes of this subsection, the term `cigarette'
 shall have the meaning given to such term by subsection (b) of section
 5702 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (4) EXCEPTION FOR RETAILERS- The taxes imposed by paragraph (1) shall not
 apply to the cigarettes in retail stocks on January 1, 1990, sold at retail.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to
 cigarettes removed after December 31, 1989.
SEC. 1407. STATE CONTRIBUTIONS.
 (a) REQUIRING STATE CONTRIBUTION TO PROVIDE COVERAGE OF SERVICES FURNISHED
 IN A STATE- Title XVIII of the Social Security Act is amended by inserting
 after section 1820 (as redesignated by section 1403(b)(8) of this title)
 the following new section:
`STATE CONTRIBUTION
 `SEC. 1821. (a) IN GENERAL- As a condition of individuals under 65 years of
 age receiving benefits under this title for services furnished in a State
 in a year (beginning with 1994), the State must provide for timely payments
 of contributions to the USHealth Trust Fund of the amount determined under
 subsection (b) for the year.
 `(b) AMOUNT OF CONTRIBUTION- The amount of a State's contribution of a
 State for a year is computed as follows:
 `(1) SYSTEM PAYMENTS FOR THE POOR-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The USHealth Board, each year, shall estimate the total
 amount of payments to be made under this title for services furnished
 during the year to beneficiaries who are in poor families.
 `(B) ADJUSTMENTS FOR PREVIOUS MISESTIMATES- The Board shall adjust the
 amount determined under subparagraph (A) for a year to reflect under-
 and over-estimations of amounts under that subparagraph for previous years.
 `(C) POOR FAMILIES DEFINED- In this section, the term `poor family' means,
 for a year, a family the income of which for the year is less than the
 nonfarm official poverty line defined by the Official of Management and
 Budget (and revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus
 Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981) applicable to a family of that size.
 `(2) DISTRIBUTIONAL FORMULA-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Each State's contribution amount for a year is equal
 to one-half of the amount computed under paragraph (1) for the year
 multiplied by the State's distributional factor and divided by the sum of
 the distributional factors for all the States.
 `(B) DISTRIBUTIONAL FACTOR DEFINED- In subparagraph (A), the term
 `distributional factor' means the product of two factors:
 `(i) POPULATION RATIO- The ratio of the State's population to the population
 of all the States.
 `(ii) INCOME RATIO- The ratio of the per capita income in the State to
 the per capita income of individuals in the continental United States
 (including Alaska) and Hawaii.'.
SEC. 1408. TAX SURCHARGE ON ALL TAXPAYERS TO ASSURE FUNDING FOR USHEALTH
PROGRAM.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of
 1986 (relating to determination of tax liability) is amended by adding at
 the end thereof the following new part:
`PART VII--TAX SURCHARGE FOR USHEALTH PROGRAM
`Sec. 60. Tax surcharge.
`SEC. 60. TAX SURCHARGE.
 `(a) IMPOSITION OF TAX- In addition to the other taxes imposed by this
 chapter, there is hereby imposed on the income of every person for each
 surtax year a tax equal to the applicable percentage of the adjusted tax
 for such surtax year.
 `(b) APPLICABLE PERCENTAGE- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The term `applicable percentage' means the percentage
 prescribed under paragraph (2).
 `(2) DETERMINATION OF APPLICABLE PERCENTAGE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Not later than December 15th of each calendar year after
 1990, the Secretary shall prescribe the applicable percentage which shall
 apply to the following calendar year.
 `(B) DETERMINATION OF PERCENTAGE- The applicable percentage which shall
 apply for any calendar year is the percentage which the Secretary estimates
 will result in revenues for such calendar year from the tax imposed by
 this section equal to the needed revenue amount for such calendar year.
 `(C) NEEDED REVENUE AMOUNT- The needed revenue amount for any calendar
 year is the Secretary's estimate of the excess of--
 `(i) the aggregate estimated cost of the USHealth Program for such calendar
 year, over
 `(ii) the sum of--
 `(I) the aggregate revenues to the USHealth Program Trust Fund described
 in section 1817(a) (other than under this section) for such year,
 `(II) interest accruing to such Trust Fund during such year, and
 `(III) a contingency amount (established by the USHealth Board, taking
 into account the balances in such Trust Fund and potential fluctuations
 in sources of revenues to the Trust Fund) sufficient to assure such Trust
 Fund has sufficient funds to meet obligations under the USHealth Program
 during such year.
 `(c) ADJUSTED TAX- For purposes of this section, the term `adjusted tax'
 means, with respect to any surtax year, the tax imposed by this chapter for
 such year determined without regard to the taxes imposed by section 871(a)
 and 881.
 `(d) SURTAX YEAR- For purposes of this section, the term `surtax year'
 means any taxable year ending after December 31, 1990.
 `(e) NO CREDITS AGAINST TAX- The tax imposed by this section shall not
 be treated as a tax imposed by this chapter for purposes of determining
 the amount of any credit allowable under subpart A, B, or D of part IV of
 this subchapter.
 `(f) SPECIAL RULES-
 `(1) TAXABLE YEARS BEGINNING BEFORE JANUARY 1, 1991- In the case of a
 surtax year which begins before January 1, 1991, the amount of the tax
 imposed by subsection (a) shall be an amount equal to the amount of the tax
 which would be imposed by subsection (a) for such surtax year (determined
 without regard to this paragraph) multiplied by a fraction--
 `(A) the numerator of which is the number of days in the surtax year which
 are after December 31, 1990, and
 `(B) the denominator of which is the number of days in the entire surtax
 year.
 `(2) SURTAX YEARS WHICH INCLUDE PORTIONS OF 2 CALENDAR YEARS- In the case
 of a surtax year which includes portions of 2 calendar years (and to
 which paragraph (1) does not apply), the tax imposed by subsection (a)
 shall be the sum of the amounts determined under rules similar to the
 rules of paragraph (1) computed--
 `(A) separately for each such portion, and
 `(B) as if, as to the portion for which the computation is being made,
 the other portions were not included in the surtax period.
 `(3) SECTION 15 NOT TO APPLY- Section 15 shall not apply to the tax imposed
 by this section.
 `(g) ESTIMATED TAX- For purposes of applying sections 6654 and 6655
 (relating to estimated tax for individuals and corporations) with respect
 to any installment which is required to take into account the tax imposed
 by this section, sections 6654(d)(1)(B)(ii) and 6655(d)(1) shall not apply.
 `(h) ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS- For purposes of this title, to the extent the
 tax imposed by this section is attributable (under regulations prescribed
 by the Secretary) to a tax imposed by another section of this chapter,
 such tax shall be deemed to be imposed by such other section.'
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of parts for subchapter A of chapter 1
 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item:
`Part VII. Tax surcharge for USHealth Program.'
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years ending after December 31, 1990.
SEC. 1409. USHEALTH PROGRAM TRUST FUND.
 (a) REDESIGNATION OF FEDERAL HOSPITAL INSURANCE TRUST FUND- Section 1817
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i) is amended--
 (1) by amending its heading to read as follows:
`USHEALTH PROGRAM TRUST FUND';
 (2) in subsection (a), by striking `Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund'
 and inserting `USHealth Program Trust Fund';
 (3) in subsection (b)--
 (A) by striking `composed of the' and all that follows through `Senate'
 and inserting `composed of the USHealth Board',
 (B) by striking `The Secretary of the Treasury' and inserting `The chairman
 of the USHealth Board',
 (C) by striking `Administrator of the Health Care Financing Administration'
 and inserting `USHealth Administrator',
 (D) by striking `Health Care Financing Administration' the second place
 it appears and inserting `USHealth Administration';
 (4) in subsection (h), by striking `Secretary of Health and Human Services'
 and inserting `USHealth Administrator'; and
 (5) by striking subsection (j).
 (b) INCORPORATION OF ADDITIONAL FUNDING SOURCES- Section 1817(a) of such
 Act is further amended--
 (1) by striking `or' at the end of paragraph (1),
 (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (2) and inserting a
 semicolon, and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following new paragraphs:
 `(3) the aggregate increase in tax liabilities under chapter 1 of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 which is attributable to the application of
 section 60;
 `(4) the aggregate increase in tax liabilities under chapter 1 of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 which is attributable to the amendments made
 by section 1409 of the USHealth Program Act;
 `(5) the contributions of States made under section 1821;
 `(6) the taxes imposed, after December 31, 1993, by section 5701(b)(3)
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986;
 `(7) the taxes imposed by sections 1401(c) and 3111(c) of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986;
 `(8) the amounts credited to the USHealth Program Trust Fund under section
 9602(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986;
 `(9) copayments and coinsurance paid on or after January 1, 1994, under
 section 1813; and
 `(10) premiums paid for months on or after January 1994 under section 1820.'.
 (c) OFF-BUDGET TREATMENT OF TRUST FUND- (1) Section 1817 of such Act is
 further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(k)(1) The receipts and disbursements of the Trust Fund, and the taxes
 imposed under sections 60, 1401(b), 3101(b), 3111(a), 3111(c), and
 5701(b)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, shall not be included
 in the totals of the budget of the United States Government as submitted
 by the President or of the Congressional budget and shall be exempt from
 any general budget limitation imposed by statute on expenditures and net
 lending (budget outlays) of the United States Government.
 `(2) No provision of law enacted after January 1, 1994 (other than a
 provision of an appropriation Act that appropriates funds authorized under
 this title as in effect on such date), may provide for payments from the
 general fund of the Treasury to the Trust Fund, or for payments from the
 Trust Fund to the general fund of the Treasury.'.
 (2) Section 710 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 911), as in effect for fiscal years
 beginning with fiscal year 1992, is amended--
 (A) by striking subsection (b), and
 (B) in subsection (a)--
 (i) by striking `(a)', and
 (ii) by striking `, the Federal Disability' and all that follows through
 `3111' and inserting `and the Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund and
 the taxes imposed under sections 1401(a), 3101(a), and 3111(a)'.
 (d) REPEAL OF FEDERAL HOSPITAL INSURANCE CATASTROPHIC COVERAGE RESERVE FUND,
 FEDERAL SUPPLEMENTARY MEDICAL INSURANCE TRUST FUND, FEDERAL CATASTROPHIC
 DRUG INSURANCE TRUST FUND, AND MEDICARE CATASTROPHIC COVERAGE ACCOUNT-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Sections 1817A, 1841, 1841A, and 1841B of the Social
 Security Act are repealed.
 (2) TRANSFER OF FUNDS- Funds in, and obligations of, the Federal Hospital
 Insurance Catastrophic Coverage Reserve Fund, the Federal Supplementary
 Medical Insurance Trust Fund, and the Federal Catastrophic Drug Insurance
 Trust Fund shall become funds in, and obligations of, the USHealth Trust
 Fund as of January 1, 1994, and any reference in any provision of law
 to such Reserve Fund or Trust Funds shall, as of such date, be deemed a
 reference to the USHealth Program Trust Fund.
 (e) REPEAL OF SEPARATE APPROPRIATIONS- Section 1844 of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395w) is repealed.
 (f) EXTENDING BORROWING AUTHORITY OF TRUST FUND- Section 1817(j) of such
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i(j)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking `prior to January 1988', and
 (2) by amending subparagraph (C) of paragraph (1) to read as follows:
 `(C) The full amount of all loans made under paragraph (1) shall be repaid
 at the earliest feasible date.'.
 (g) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- (1) Section 706 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 907)
 is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a), by striking `the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust
 Fund, and the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund' and
 inserting `the USHealth Program Trust Fund',
 (B) in subsection (a), by striking `parts A and B of', and
 (C) in subsection (d), by inserting `and' at the end of paragraph (1),
 and by amending paragraphs (2) and (3) to read as follows:
 `(2) a separate report with respect to the USHealth Program under title
 XVIII.'.
 (2) Section 1159 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1320c-8) is amended by striking
 `from--' and all that follows through the end and inserting `from the
 USHealth Program Trust Fund.'.
 (3) Paragraph (5) of section 1876(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395mm(a))
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(5) The payment to an eligible organization under this section shall be
 made from the USHealth Program Trust Fund.'.
 (h) EFFECTIVE DATE- This section, and the amendments made by this section,
 shall take effect on January 1, 1994, except that the amendments made by
 subsection (b) shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (i) TRANSITION- Any reference in any provision of law to the Federal
 Hospital Insurance Trust Fund is deemed, as of January 1, 1994, to be a
 reference to the USHealth Program Trust Fund.
SEC. 1410. REPEAL OF EXCLUSION FROM INCOME OF EMPLOYER HEALTH INSURANCE
CONTRIBUTIONS.
 (a) STRIKING EXCLUSION- Section 106 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986
 (relating to contributions by employer to accident and health plans)
 is repealed.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- (1) Section 104(c) of such Code is amended by
 striking paragraph (1).
 (2) Section 162 of such Code is amended by striking subsection (l).
 (c) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for part 3 of subchapter
 B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to
 section 106.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.
TITLE V--QUALITY ASSURANCE
SEC. 1501. NATIONAL COUNCIL ON QUALITY ASSURANCE.
 Part B of title XI of the Social Security Act is amended by adding at the
 end the following new section:
`NATIONAL COUNCIL ON QUALITY ASSURANCE
 `SEC. 1165. (a) ESTABLISHMENT- There is established a National Council on
 Quality Assurance (in this section referred to as the `Council').
 `(b) APPOINTMENT AND COMPOSITION- (1) The Director of the Congressional
 Office of Technology Assessment (in this section referred to as the
 `Director' and the `Office', respectively) shall provide for the appointment
 of members of the Council.
 `(2) Except as provided in paragraph (4), the Council shall consist of
 nine members--
 `(A) three of whom are representatives of USHealth Program beneficiaries,
 `(B) three of whom are representatives of USHealth Program providers, and
 `(C) three of whom are experts in quality assurance for medical care.
 `(3) Members of the Council described in paragraph (2) shall first
 be appointed no later than January 1, 1992, for a term of three years,
 except that the Director may provide initially for such shorter terms as
 will insure that (on a continuing basis) the terms of no more than three
 such members expire in any one year.
 `(4) The Director may provide for an expansion of the number of members on
 the Council so long as the representatives described in paragraph (2)(A)
 compose not less than 30 percent of the membership of the Council.
 `(c) FUNCTIONS- (1) The Council's general functions are--
 `(A) to provide oversight on the operations of the quality assurance
 system, and
 `(B) to make recommendations annually to the USHealth Board and the Congress
 for improvements in the system.
 `(2) More specifically, the Council shall review--
 `(A) the administration of quality assurance by the USHealth Administration,
 `(B) the overall performance of utilization and quality control peer review
 organizations under this part,
 `(C) the reports of consumer boards of these organizations,
 `(D) the data needs of these organizations,
 `(E) quality assurance studies and methodologies developed by the USHealth
 Administration and others, and
 `(F) all suggestions made for improvement in quality assurance systems.
 `(d) STAFF- (1) Subject to such review as the Office deems necessary to
 assure the efficient administration of the Council, the Council may--
 `(1) employ and fix the compensation of an Executive Director (subject to
 the approval of the Director of the Office) and such other personnel (not
 to exceed 10) as may be necessary to carry out its duties (without regard
 to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments
 in the competitive service);
 `(2) seek such assistance and support as may be required in the performance
 of its duties from appropriate Federal departments and agencies;
 `(3) enter into contracts or make other arrangements as may be necessary
 for the conduct of the work of the Council (without regard to section 3709
 of the Revised Statutes);
 `(4) make advance, progress, and other payments which relate to the work
 of the Council;
 `(5) provide transportation and subsistence for persons serving without
 compensation; and
 `(6) prescribe such rules and regulations as it deems necessary with
 respect to the internal organization and operation of the Council.
Section 10(a)(1) of the Federal Advisory Committee Act shall not apply to
any portion of a Council meeting if the Council, by majority vote, determines
that such portion of the meeting should be closed.
 `(e) COMPENSATION AND TRAVEL EXPENSES- (1) While serving on the business
 of the Council (including traveltime), a member of the Council shall be
 entitled to compensation at the per diem equivalent of the rate provided
 for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5,
 United States Code; and while so serving away from home and his regular
 place of business, a member may be allowed travel expenses, as authorized
 by the Chairman of the Council.
 `(2) Physicians serving as personnel of the Council may be provided a
 physician comparability allowance by the Council in the same manner as
 Government physicians may be provided such an allowance by an agency under
 section 5948 of title 5, United States Code, and for such purpose subsection
 (i) of such section shall apply to the Council in the same manner as it
 applies to the Tennessee Valley Authority.
 `(f) COORDINATION IN CONDUCT OF ACTIVITIES- The Council shall have access
 to such relevant information as may be available from appropriate Federal
 agencies and shall assure that its activities are coordinated with the
 activities of Federal agencies.
 `(g) REPORTS- (1) The Office shall report annually to the Congress on the
 functioning and progress of the Council.
 `(2) The Office shall have unrestricted access to all deliberations,
 records, and data of the Council, immediately upon its request.
 `(3) In order to carry out its duties under this subsection, the Office is
 authorized to expend reasonable and necessary funds as mutually agreed upon
 by the Office and the Council. The Office shall be reimbursed for such funds
 by the Council from the appropriations made with respect to the Council.
 `(h) AUDIT- The Council shall be subject to periodic audit by the General
 Accounting Office.
 `(i) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- (1) There are authorized to be
 appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of
 this section.
 `(2) All of such appropriation shall be payable from the USHealth Trust Fund.
 `(3) The Council shall submit requests for appropriations in the same manner
 as the Office submits requests for appropriations, but amounts appropriated
 for the Council shall be separate from amounts appropriated for the Office.'.
SEC. 1502. EMPHASIS BY PEER REVIEW ORGANIZATIONS ON QUALITY ASSURANCE.
 (a) USE OF AT LEAST ONE-HALF OF EFFORT ON QUALITY ASSURANCE- Section 1153(c)
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320c-2(c)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (7),
 (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (8) and inserting `;
 and', and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(9) the organization must devote at least one-half of its efforts under
 the contract on quality assurance activities.'.
 (b) USE OF NATIONAL COUNCIL'S RECOMMENDATIONS- Section 1153 of such Act
 is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(h) The USHealth Board, in the administration of this part, shall take into
 account recommendations made by the National Council on Quality Assurance.'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to
 contracts entered into on or after January 1, 1990.
SEC. 1503. EXTENSION OF QUALITY ASSURANCE TO ALL SERVICES.
 (a) REQUIRING QUALITY ASSURANCE FOR ALL TYPES OF SERVICES- The third
 sentence of section 1154(a)(4)(A) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1320c-3(a)(4)(A)) is amended by striking `quality of services' and
 inserting `quality of all the different types of health and long-term care
 services and items (including inpatient and outpatient hospital services,
 extended care services, physicians' services, nurses' services, home health
 services, day health care, and hospice care), whether payment may be made
 (in whole or in part) under title XVIII or (except as provided in subsection
 (i)) under a State plan approved under title XIX or through a private payor,
 coordinate these activities with the quality assurance activities of other
 entities, and'.
 (b) PEER QUALITY REVIEW OF NURSE PRACTITIONERS, CLINICAL NURSE SPECIALISTS,
 AND CERTIFIED NURSE MIDWIVES- Section 1154 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1320c-3)
 is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1), by inserting `(including licensed nurse
 practitioners, clinical nurse specialists, certified nurse midwives,
 and certified registered nurse anesthetists)' after `other health care
 practitioners';
 (2) in subsection (a)(7)(A), by inserting `(including licensed nurse
 practitioners, clinical nurse specialists, certified nurse midwives,
 and certified registered nurse anesthetists)' after `of persons';
 (3) in subsection (a), by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(16) The organization shall conduct review activities (including peer
 review of quality) with respect to services provided by licensed nurse
 practitioners, clinical nurse specialists, certified nurse midwives,
 and certified registered nurse anesthetists. In conducting such reviews,
 the organization shall, to the maximum extent feasible, consult with
 nurses in the same nursing specialty as the nurse specialty providing the
 services.'; and
 (4) by adding at the end of subsection (c) the following: `A utilization
 and quality control peer review organization shall, to the maximum extent
 feasible, utilize the services of individuals who are duly licensed nurse
 practitioners, clinical nurse specialists, certified nurse midwives, or
 certified registered nurse anesthetists to make final determinations of
 denial decisions with respect to the professional conduct of any other
 duly licensed nurse practitioner, clinical nurse specialist, certified
 nurse midwife, or certified registered nurse anesthetist, respectively.'.
 (c) REQUIRING COMPOSITION OF PRO'S TO REFLECT TYPES OF SERVICES REVIEWED-
 Section 1152 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1320c-1) is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (2),
 (2) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (4), and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following new paragraph:
 `(3) includes in its composition and on its governing body representatives
 of other individuals responsible for the provision of services and items
 for which the organization is responsible for conducting quality assurance
 activities under section 1154(a)(4)(A); and'.
 (d) PROVIDING INFORMATION TO PRO'S TO CONDUCT ACTIVITIES- Section 1153 of
 such Act, as amended by section 1502(b) of this subdivision, is further
 amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(i) The USHealth Administrator shall provide each utilization and quality
 control peer review organization with such information as may be necessary
 for the organization to carry out subsection (c)(10).'.
 (e) PERMITTING STATE PLAN FOR QUALITY ASSURANCE- Section 1153 of such Act,
 as amended by section 1502(b) and subsection (d), is further amended by
 adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(j)(1) The requirements of section 1154(a)(4)(A) with respect to quality
 and assurance activities described in that subsection shall not apply to
 activities in a State if the State has established its own plan for quality
 assurance which is approved by the USHealth Board and which provides at
 least the same level of protection as would otherwise apply under this part.
 `(2) The USHealth Board may authorize such funding from the USHealth Trust
 Fund as it determined to be necessary to carry out plans established under
 paragraph (1).'.
 (e) REQUIRING USE OF PROS FOR REVIEW OF HMOS- Section 1154(a)(4) of such
 Act is amended by striking the second sentence of subparagraph (B) and by
 striking subparagraph (C).
 (f) EFFECTIVE DATE- (1) The amendments made by this section shall apply
 to contracts entered into on or after January 1, 1993.
 (2) It is the intent of Congress that the USHealth Board should provide, in
 entering into contracts with utilization and quality control peer review
 organizations before that date, for the phase-in of the requirements
 imposed by such amendments.
SEC. 1504. CONSUMER BOARDS.
 (a) REQUIREMENT- Section 1152 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320c-1),
 as amended by section 1503(c) of this Act, is further amended--
 (1) by inserting `AND CONSUMER BOARDS' at the end of the heading,
 (2) by inserting `(a)' after `1152.',
 (3) by inserting before the period at the end of paragraph (4) the following:
 has a consumer board (as defined in subsection (b)) for each State served
 by the organization', and
 (4) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(b)(1) In this subpart, the term `consumer board' means, with respect to
 a utilization and quality control peer review organization serving a State,
 a board--
 `(A) composed of at least 5 members--
 `(i) who are appointed by the chief executive officer of the State,
 `(ii) who represent organizations reflecting the mix of beneficiaries
 under the program, and
 `(iii) all of whom are serving on the board without compensation;
 `(B) which has the responsiblities of--
 `(i) conducting continuing oversight of the activities of the organization
 in the area of the State served by the organization,
 `(ii) providing information to the USHealth Administrator in awarding
 contracts to organizations under this part,
 `(iii) receiving information from USHealth Program beneficiaries and other
 interested individuals and entities on the organization's activities,
 `(iv) educating such beneficiaries, in the area of the State served by the
 organization, on quality assurance and on the availability of assistance
 from the organization and other agencies, and
 `(v) reporting annually to the USHealth Board, the chief executive
 officer of the State, and the National Council on Quality Assurance on
 the organization's performance,
but which is not involved in the day-to-day operations of the organization.'.
 (b) ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PRO'S RESPECTING CONSUMER BOARDS- Section
 1154(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1320c-3(a)) is amended by adding at the
 end the following new paragraph:
 `(15) The organization shall be responsible--
 `(A) for educating USHealth Program beneficiaries, the areas served by the
 organization, on quality assurance and on the availability of assistance
 from the organization and other entities,
 `(B) for making available to its consumer board (or boards) such information
 (including information derived from operation of the telephone service
 described in section 1154(a)(16)) as may be necessary for the board to
 perform its duties, and
 `(C) for providing members of its consumer board (or boards) with such
 training and staff support as may be necessary for the board to perform
 its duties,
but shall not make available to any consumer board information on either
individual beneficiaries or individual health care providers.'.
 (c) CONSIDERATION OF CONSUMER BOARD RECOMMENDATIONS IN AWARDING CONTRACTS-
 Section 1153 of such Act, as amended by sections 502(b), 503(c), 503(d)
 of this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following new
 subsection:
 `(k) In awarding contracts under this section, the USHealth Administrator
 shall take into consideration recommendations made by consumer boards
 described in section 1152(b).'.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to
 contracts with organizations as of January 1, 1993, for services furnished
 on or after such date.
SEC. 1505. QUALITY ASSURANCE HOT-LINE.
 (a) REQUIRING ESTABLISHMENT OF HOT-LINES- Section 1154(a) of the Social
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320c-3(a)), as amended by section 504(b) of this
 Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 ` (16) The organization shall--
 `(A) provide for a toll-free telephone service which (i) is available,
 during business hours, 7-days-a-week, for receiving questions and complaints
 from USHealth Program beneficiaries, providers, and other interested
 parties in the area served by the organization concerning the quality
 of health care services and items referred to in paragraph (1), and (ii)
 is coordinated with the hot-lines operated under ombudsman programs under
 section 1889(b)(4) and with any State quality assurance program, and
 `(B) assist in the resolution of any such complaints that are legitimate.'.
 (b) DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ON HOT-LINE- Subsection (d) of section
 1154 of such Act is amended to read as follows:
 `(d) The USHealth Administrator, in coordination with each utilization and
 quality control peer review organization, shall provide each USHealth Program
 beneficiary residing in an area served by the organization with the number
 of the telephone service (required under subsection (a)(16)) in a format
 that can easily be attached to the beneficiary's USHealth Program card.'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to
 contracts entered into on or after January 1, 1993.
SEC. 1506. FUNDING OF INCREASED ACTIVITIES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1159 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320c-8)
 is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(a)' after `1159.', and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsections:
 `(b)(1) In addition to any other amounts appropriated to carry out this
 part but subject to subsection (e), there are appropriated to carry out
 this part from the funds in the USHealth Program Trust Fund--
 `(A) for fiscal year 1994, an amount equal to 50 percent of the hospital
 payment amounts (as defined in paragraph (4)) for that year,
 `(B) for fiscal year 1995, an amount equal to 65 percent of the hospital
 payment amounts for that year,
 `(C) for fiscal year 1996, an amount equal to 75 percent of the hospital
 payment amounts for that year, and
 `(D) for each subsequent fiscal year, such an amount (not less than the
 amount described in subparagraph (C)) as the USHealth Board determines
 to be necessary to conduct the required reviews for all types of covered
 services and for all covered beneficiaries.
 `(2) The USHealth Administrator shall provide for the distribution of
 the amounts appropriated under paragraph (1) to the utilization and
 quality control peer review organizations with contracts under this part
 in reasonable proportion to each organization's expenses under this part
 which are not otherwise covered under section 1886(a)(1)(G) and which are
 attributable to activities with respect to health care services furnished
 under title XVIII.
 `(3) In paragraph (1), the term `hospital payment amounts' means, with
 respect to a utilization and quality control peer review organization for
 a fiscal year, the aggregate amounts payable to the organization under
 section 1866(a)(1)(G) for the fiscal year.
 `(c)(1) Notwithstanding subsection (b), to the extent that the USHealth
 Board determines that including review activities of services furnished
 other than under this Act provides for increased efficiency of operation
 of utilization and quality control peer review organizations, the Board
 may provide that up to 25 percent of the amounts otherwise appropriated
 under such subsections shall be withheld.
 `(2) In the case of a State with a quality assurance and utilization
 control plan approved by the USHealth Administrator, the amounts otherwise
 appropriated under this section to utilization and quality control peer
 review organizations for activities in that State shall be made available
 to that State for operation of its plan instead of to such organizations.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The USHealth Board shall provide for the initial
 implementation of the amendments made by this section by January 1, 1993,
 with such amendments becoming fully operational on January 1, 1994.
SEC. 1507. ASSURING QUALITY OF CARE MANAGEMENT AND HOME CARE SERVICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Title XVIII of the Social Security Act is amended by
 inserting before section 1891 the following new section:
`CARE MANAGEMENT AND HOME CARE QUALITY ASSURANCE
 `SEC. 1890. (a) HOME HEALTH AGENCY QUALITY ASSURANCE REQUIREMENTS- (1)
 In addition to such other requirements as may apply, the USHealth Board
 shall promulgate regulations requiring that to receive funding for the
 provision of home care services under this title, a home health agency
 must within 6 months after the date of the publication of such regulations--
 `(A)(i) implement procedures for promptly reviewing and resolving grievances
 of home care consumers; and
 `(ii) provide a written copy of such procedures to each home care consumer
 (or the consumer's representative or guardian) who receives home care
 services from the home health agency;
 `(B) ensure that each home care provider employed by or under contract
 with the home health agency receives training--
 `(i) sufficient to meet a level of proficiency established by the Board
 in regulations (in consultation with representatives of the elderly,
 disabled, and children, home health agencies, and experts in the fields
 of geriatric nursing, pediatric nursing, geriatric social work, pediatric
 social work, mental health, rehabilitation, and other appropriate health
 care professionals) to be appropriate in content and amount;
 `(ii) which develops separate levels of proficiency in and is reflective
 of the range of skills required of home care providers providing different
 levels of home care services; and
 `(iii) the extent of which shall be made available on request to each
 home care consumer with respect to the amount of training or level of
 certification achieved by each home care provider;
 `(C) supervise all home care providers employed by or under contract to the
 home health agency in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Board
 (including regular random on-site supervisory visits by registered nurses
 or other appropriate health care professionals); and
 `(D) perform annual evaluations of quality of services rendered by home
 care providers employed by or under contract to the home health agency
 which includes and documents home care consumer involvement.
The Board may provide for a temporary waiver of the requirements of
subparagraph (C) or (D) of this paragraph for such period (not to exceed one
year, but subject to renewal) as the Board deems appropriate in the case of an
agency serving an area that is a rural area or that is designated as a health
manpower shortage area under section 332 of the Public Health Service Act if
(i) failure to waive such requirements would significantly limit access to
home health services to beneficiaries residing in the area, (ii) the agency
has made and continues to make good faith efforts to meet such requirements,
and (iii) waiver of such requirements does not jeopardize the health, safety,
or well-being of beneficiaries receiving home health services.
 `(2) In addition to such other requirements as may apply, to receive
 funding for the provision of home care services under this title, other
 than services limited to durable medical equipment services (as defined
 in subsection (l)(3)) and other than long-term home care provided by
 a long-term home care management agency that meets the requirements of
 subsection (b), a home health agency shall establish client care processes
 (provided directly or under contract) which include--
 `(A) a plan of care which states reasonable and measurable client objectives
 and home care services to be provided to meet the objectives;
 `(B) a plan of care that employs outcome measures care insofar as they
 are appropriate and available for each home care consumer served;
 `(C) methods for periodic review of--
 `(i) a home care consumer's needs; and
 `(ii) the plan of care for a home care consumer; and
 `(D) a statement of criteria and procedures for discharge or transfer to
 another agency, program, or service.
 `(3) In addition to such other requirements as may apply, to receive funding
 for the provision of durable medical equipment services under this title,
 a home health agency or home care provider shall in each case of a home
 care consumer to which such services are provided--
 `(A) issue written instructions for the operation of such equipment;
 `(B) provide sufficient training to the home care consumer, the home care
 consumer's family, and staff to allow correct, safe operation of all such
 equipment; and
 `(C) formulate an emergency plan appropriate to the home health services
 provided to the home care consumer.
 `(b) LONG-TERM CARE MANAGEMENT QUALITY ASSURANCE REQUIREMENTS- In addition
 to such other requirements as may apply, the USHealth Board shall promulgate
 regulations requiring that to receive funding for the provision of care
 management services (as defined in section 1861(mm)(2)) under this title,
 a long-term care management agency must within 6 months after the date of
 the publication of such regulations--
 `(1)(A) help assure compliance with any applicable consumers' bill of
 rights promulgated under this Act; and
 `(B) provide, as appropriate, a written copy of such bill of rights to
 each long-term care consumer (or the consumer's representative or guardian)
 who receives long-term care services from the providers under this title;
 `(2)(A) implement procedures for promptly reviewing and resolving grievances
 of consumers; and
 `(B) provide a written copy of such procedures to each consumer (or the
 consumer's representative or guardian) who receives long-term care services;
 `(3) provide to each consumer (or the consumer's representative or guardian)
 a written statement of the services to be provided to the consumer and
 the schedule for provision of such services, as agreed upon by the consumer;
 `(4) provide to each consumer a clear written statement as to how the
 consumer, or the consumer's representative or guardian, may appeal benefit
 and level decisions made by the agency;
 `(5) maintain procedures that assure prompt access to long-term care for
 eligible consumers;
 `(6) ensure that personnel providing care management services to long-term
 care consumers have received adequate training as prescribed in regulations
 by the Board, in consultation with the National Council on Quality Assurance
 (established under section 1165); and
 `(7) establish and implement care management processes which include--
 `(A) a plan of care which states reasonable and measurable client objectives
 and services to be provided to meet the objectives;
 `(B) a plan of care that employs outcome measures care insofar as they
 are appropriate and available for each consumer served;
 `(C) methods for periodic review of--
 `(i) a consumer's needs; and
 `(ii) the plan of care for a consumer;
 `(D) methods for follow-up and on-going monitoring of patient and services
 delivery; and
 `(E) a statement of criteria and procedures for discharge or transfer to
 another agency, program, or service.
 `(c) SURVEY REQUIREMENTS- (1) The USHealth Board shall, in consultation
 with the National Council on Quality Assurance, promulgate regulations which
 establish procedures for surveying home health agencies and long-term care
 management agencies regarding compliance with conditions of participation
 established by this section.
 `(2) The results of surveys performed under this subsection shall be provided
 to the National Council on Quality Assurance, peer review organizations,
 and Consumer Boards, and shall be made available to others in accordance
 with this title.
 `(d) DEVELOPMENT OF LICENSING POLICIES- The USHealth Board shall--
 `(1) encourage States to develop policies and procedures for the licensing
 of home health agencies;
 `(2) gather information relating to activities of States in implementing
 licensing policies and procedures; and
 `(3) issue a biannual report which summarizes information gathered under
 paragraph (2).
 `(e) TRAINING GRANTS- (1) The USHealth Board shall issue guidelines and
 provide funding for grants for training programs for home health agencies,
 long-term care management agencies, and home care providers.
 `(2) In awarding grants under paragraph (1), the Board shall give special
 consideration to--
 `(A) the training of paraprofessionals (including homemakers, home health
 aides, and family caregivers) and professionals providing care management
 services;
 `(B) the training of care management and home care providers who are
 members of minorities and ethnic groups;
 `(C) training programs for high technology home care services (as defined
 by the Board) that assist professional health care providers in adapting
 their services to high technology therapies to be provided as home care
 services; and
 `(D) training of home care providers who will provide long-term home care
 services to chronically ill or disabled children.
 `(3) Training materials shall be provided by the USHealth program to
 States and home health agencies, long-term care management agencies,
 and home care providers.
 `(4) The Board shall encourage States to work with home health agencies,
 home care providers, and educational institutions, especially those with
 a demonstrated expertise in geriatrics, pediatrics, and gerontology,
 to provide training to home care providers.
 `(f) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund $50,000,000 for each of fiscal
 years 1993 and 1994 and from the USHealth Trust Fund $25,000,000 for each
 succeeding fiscal year for training related to the provision of long-term
 care and long-term management services and such sums as may be necessary
 in each fiscal year to carry out the remaining provisions of this section.'.
SEC. 1508. HOSPITAL DISCHARGE PLANNING PROCESS.
 (a) DISCHARGE PLANNING PROCESS- Subsection (ee) of section 1861 of the
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x) is amended to read as follows:
`Discharge Planning Process
 `(ee)(1) A discharge planning process of a hospital shall be considered
 sufficient if it is applicable to services furnished by the hospital to
 individuals entitled to insurance benefits under this title and if it
 meets the guidelines and standards established by the USHealth Board under
 paragraph (2).
 `(2) The USHealth Board shall develop, in conjunction with the National
 Council on Quality Assurance, guidelines and standards for the discharge
 planning process in order to protect against inappropriately early
 hospital discharges and to ensure a timely and smooth transition to the
 most appropriate type of and setting for post-hospital care. The guidelines
 and standards shall include the following:
 `(A) Protocols and screens to permit the early identification of patients
 likely to need post-hospital care and to permit the identification of
 patients at risk of premature discharge from a hospital.
 `(B) Patient and family education and involvement in identifying their
 options and post-hospital benefits available under this title, on their
 rights of appeal with respect to coverage under this title, and on
 appropriate techniques for self-care.
 `(C) Psychosocial and physical assessments and counseling of patients and
 families in determining patients' post-hospital needs.
 `(D) The development, beginning as close to the time of a patient's admission
 to the hospital as appropriate, of a discharge plan in consultation with
 the patient and family and all relevant health care professionals.
 `(E) Alerting appropriate skilled nursing facilities and home health
 agencies of a patient's anticipated need for post-hospital care at the
 earliest possible time.
 `(F) Assigning responsibility for the development and implementation of
 a discharge plan within the hospital, during the transfer of a patient to
 post-hospital care and in patient follow-up after discharge.'.
 (c) MONITORING BY PEER REVIEW ORGANIZATIONS OF HOSPITAL COMPLIANCE WITH
 DISCHARGE PLANNING PROCESS- Section 1154(a) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1320c-3(a)), as amended by sections 504(b) and 505(a) of this Act,
 is further amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(17) The organization shall monitor hospitals' compliance with the
 discharge planning process requirements specified in section 1861(ee).'.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The requirements of section 1861(ee) of the Social
 Security Act shall apply to patients discharged on or after January 1, 1992.
SEC. 1509. ASSURING PRE-PAID ORGANIZATIONS PROVIDE QUALITY, ACCESSIBLE MENTAL
HEALTH SERVICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1876(c) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395mm(c)) is amended by inserting `(including outpatient mental
 health services)' after `services' the first place it appears in paragraphs
 (4)(A) and (6).
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall be effective
 for services provided on or after January 1, 1991.
SEC. 1510. CONSUMERS' BILL OF RIGHTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Title XVIII of the Social Security Act, as amended by
 section 1301(a) of this Act, is further amended by inserting after section
 1887 the following new section:
`CONSUMERS' BILL OF RIGHTS
 `SEC. 1888. The USHealth Board shall promulgate, by regulation, a consumers'
 bill of rights, which shall recognize the following as rights of consumers
 which may be asserted by the consumer or his or her representative:
 `(1) To be treated with courtesy, respect, and full recognition of one's
 dignity, individuality, and right to control one's own household and
 lifestyle.
 `(2) To be fully and promptly informed orally and in writing--
 `(A) of services to be provided and any limits regarding availability of
 services from the agency or provider;
 `(B) whether services may be provided under this title or are covered by
 other sources;
 `(C) regarding charges for services and billing procedures, including an
 itemized copy of each bill submitted;
 `(D) of changes in services or charges; and
 `(E) the procedures to follow if rights are violated or services are not
 satisfactory, including the right to a hearing.
 `(3) To receive treatment, care, and services consistent with agreements
 between the provider and USHealth and between the provider and the consumer.
 `(4) To take an active part in creating and changing the plan of care.
 `(5) To take an active part in selecting the provider and in selecting
 and evaluating treatment, care, and services.
 `(6) To be served by individuals who are properly trained and competent
 to perform their duties.
 `(7) To be fully informed by a provider of the provider's assessment of
 the consumer's condition.
 `(8) To refuse all or part of any treatment, care, or service, and to be
 informed of the likely consequences of such refusal.
 `(9) To receive treatment, care, and services in compliance with all State
 and local laws and regulations without discrimination in the provision or
 quality of services based on race, religion, gender, age, or creed (except as
 provided under the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6101 et seq.)).
 `(10) To be free from mental and physical abuse, neglect, and exploitation,
 and to be free from chemical and physical restraints except as authorized
 in writing by a physician for a specified period of time.
 `(11) To receive respect and privacy in the consumer's treatment, care,
 and services in caring for personal needs, in communications, and in all
 daily activities.
 `(12) To be assured respect for the consumer's property rights.
 `(13) To be assured confidential treatment of personal financial and medical
 records and to approve or refuse their release to any individuals outside the
 agency except as otherwise required by law or third-party payment contract.
 `(14) To voice grievances and recommend changes in policies and services to
 staff or outside representatives of his or her choice and to be assisted
 in doing so when assistance is needed, free from restraint, interference,
 coercion, discrimination, or reprisal by the provider.
 `(15) To be free to fully exercise his or her civil rights and to be
 assisted in doing so when assistance is needed.
 `(16) To be promptly notified of acceptance or denial of services and the
 reasons for such denial.
 `(17) To promptly receive written notice if treatment, care or services are
 to be reduced or terminated, and assistance to assure a smooth transition
 in services consistent with the welfare of the homecare consumer.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect
 on January 1, 1993.
SEC. 1511. HEALTH AND LONG-TERM CARE OMBUDSMAN.
 Title XVIII of the Social Security Act is further amended by inserting
 after section 1888 the end the following new section:
`HEALTH AND LONG-TERM CARE OMBUDSMAN
 `SEC. 1889. (a) GRANT PROGRAM- The USHealth Board shall provide for a
 program of grants to States for the establishment of a health and long-term
 care ombudsman in each State.
 `(b) REQUIREMENTS FOR OMBUDSMAN- In order to be eligible for a grant
 under this section, a State must have a plan that provides assurances,
 satisfactory to the USHealth Board, that the State will--
 `(1) establish and operate, either directly or through contract or other
 appropriate arrangement, a health and long-term care ombudsman program
 which provides an individual who will, on a full-time basis investigate and
 resolve complaints made by or on behalf of health care consumers relating
 to administrative action which may adversely affect the health, safety,
 welfare, and rights of such consumers, and carry out such other activities
 as the USHealth Board deems appropriate;
 `(2) establish procedures for appropriate access by the ombudsman to
 inpatient care facilities and patients' records, including procedures
 to protect the confidentiality of such records, and establish procedures
 to assure that any files maintained by the ombudsman program are treated
 as confidential;
 `(3) establish a statewide uniform reporting system to collect and analyze
 data relating to complaints and conditions in inpatient care facilities
 for the purpose of identifying and resolving significant problems; and
 `(4) establish a telephone hot-line, in coordination with telephone
 hot-lines operated by utilization and peer review organizations under
 part B of title XI and any State quality assurance programs, to receive
 complaints and information to carry out the ombudsman program.
The USHealth Board shall ensure that there is coordination between the
ombudsmen established under this section and the USHealth Ombudsman appointed
under section 1832(f).
 `(c) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 to make grants to States under this section, $55,000,000 for fiscal year
 1994 and, for each subsequent fiscal year, the amount authorized to be
 appropriated under this section for the previous fiscal year increased by
 the applicable percentage change (as defined in section 1887(a)) for the
 payment period that is the fiscal year involved.'.
SEC. 1512. STUDIES AND REPORTS.
 (a) ANNUAL REPORT ON QUALITY ASSURANCE- Section 1161 of the Social Security
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1320c-10) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(a)' after `1161.',
 (2) by striking `April' and inserting `October, and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(b) In each annual report under subsection (a), the USHealth Board shall
 include an assessment of the quality assurance system effected under this
 part, and shall address recommendations made by the National Council on
 Quality Assurance, and the concerns and recommendations of consumer boards,
 concerning that system.'.
 (b) ANNUAL STUDY AND REPORT ON IMPACT OF DRG PAYMENT SYSTEM ON QUALITY- (1)
 The Secretary of Health and Human Services (or, after 1993, the USHealth
 Board) shall study the impact that the prospective payment system (under
 section 1886 of the Social Security Act) for the payment for inpatient
 hospital services under the medicare program or the USHealth Program,
 and, in particular, payments on the basis of diagnosis-related groups
 under subsection (d) of that section, has had on the quality of inpatient
 hospital services. For each such report made after 1993, the USHealth Board
 shall include the results of a similar study on the impact that the payment
 methodology for other services and for health maintenance organizations
 under section 1876 of such Act has had on the quality of those services
 or of services furnished by such organizations.
 (2) The Secretary (or, after 1993, the USHealth Board) shall report to
 Congress not later than July 1 of each year (beginning with 1989) on the
 results of such study.
 (c) STUDIES ON IMPROVEMENT OF QUALITY ASSESSMENT- (1) The Secretary of
 Health and Human Services (or, after 1993, the USHealth Board) shall provide
 for studies on, and shall develop, improved methodologies for quality
 assessment and assurance for health care services, including inpatient
 hospital services, skilled nursing facility services, physicians' services,
 home health services, and hospice care, and other services covered under
 the medicare program or the USHealth Program.
 (2) The Secretary (or, after 1993, the USHealth Board) shall report to
 Congress not later than October 1 of each year (beginning with 1989)
 on the studies and developments conducted under paragraph (1).
 (d) STUDY ON PROGRAM FINANCING- The USHealth Board shall study and report,
 by not later than January 1, 1996, to Congress concerning the financing
 of the USHealth Program to determine if those with the ability to pay are
 paying at least the average cost of care for a program beneficiary. The
 Board shall include in its report such recommendations for changes in the
 financing of the program as the Board determines to be appropriate.
TITLE VI--ADMINISTRATION AND MISCELLANEOUS
SEC. 1601. ESTABLISHMENT OF USHEALTH ADMINISTRATION AS A SEPARATE, INDEPENDENT
AGENCY; RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE AGENCY.
 Title XVIII of the Social Security Act is amended by striking the heading
 to part B and inserting the following:
`Part B--USHealth Administration
`USHEALTH ADMINISTRATION
 `SEC. 1831. There is hereby established, as an independent agency in the
 executive branch of the Government, a USHealth Administration (in this
 part referred to as the `Administration'). It shall be the duty of the
 Administration to administer the USHealth Program under this title. In this
 title, the term `USHealth Program' means the program under this title,
 and includes part B of title XI and any other provision of this Act or
 other Act that relates directly to the program under this title.
`USHEALTH BOARD; USHEALTH ADMINISTRATOR; OTHER OFFICERS
 `SEC. 1832. (a) USHEALTH BOARD- (1)(A) The Administration shall be governed
 by a USHealth Board (in this part referred to as the `Board'). The Board
 shall be composed of 7 members appointed by the President, by and with
 the advice and consent of the Senate. The members shall be chosen, on
 the basis of their integrity, impartiality, and good judgment, from among
 individuals who, by reason of their education, experience, and attainments,
 are exceptionally qualified to perform the duties of members of the Board.
 `(B)(i) Except as provided in clauses (ii) and (iii), members of the
 Board shall be appointed for terms of 6 years. A member of the Board may
 be removed only pursuant to a finding by the President of neglect of duty
 or malfeasance in office. The President shall transmit any such finding to
 the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Majority Leader of the
 Senate not later than 5 days after the date on which such finding is made.
 `(ii) Of the members first appointed--
 `(I) two shall be appointed for a term ending June 30, 1993,
 `(II) two shall be appointed for a term ending June 30, 1995, and
 `(III) three shall be appointed for a term ending June 30, 1997,
as designated by the President at the time of appointment. Such members shall
be appointed after active consideration of recommendations made by the chairmen
of the Committee on Ways and Means, the Committee on Energy and Commerce, the
permanent Select Committee on Aging, and the Select Committee on Children,
Youth, and Families of the House of Representatives and of recommendations
made by the chairmen of the Committee on Finance, the Committee on Labor
and Human Resources, and the Special Committee on Aging of the Senate.
 `(iii) The President may not nominate an individual for appointment to a term
 of office as member of the Board before the commencement of the President's
 term of office in which the member's term of office commences. Any member
 appointed to a term of office after the commencement of such term may serve
 under such appointment only for the remainder of such term. A member may,
 at the request of the President, serve for not more than one year after
 the expiration of his or her term until his or her successor has taken
 office. A member of the Board may be appointed for additional terms.
 `(C) Not more than 4 members of the Board shall be of the same political
 party.
 `(D) A member of the Board may not, during his or her term as member,
 otherwise serve as an officer or employee of any government. If any member
 of the Board becomes an officer or employee of any government, such member
 may continue as a member of the Board for not longer than the 30-day period
 beginning on the date such member becomes such an officer or employee.
 `(E) Two members of the Board shall constitute a quorum, except that one
 member may hold hearings.
 `(F) A member of the Board shall be designated from time to time by the
 President to serve as Chairman of the Board.
 `(G) The Board shall meet at the call of the Chairman or two members of
 the Board.
 `(2) Each member of the Board shall be compensated at the rate provided
 for level II of the Executive Schedule.
 `(3) The Board shall--
 `(A) govern by regulation the USHealth Program,
 `(B) appoint a USHealth Administrator, as described in subsection (b),
 to act as the chief operating officer of the Administration responsible
 for administering the USHealth Program,
 `(C) constitute the Board of Trustees of the USHealth Program Trust Fund,
 with the Chairman of the Board serving as Chairman of such Board of Trustees,
 `(D) make annual budgetary recommendations relating to the Administration,
 including costs of the USHealth Program, and defend such recommendations
 before the appropriate committees of each House of the Congress,
 `(E) make recommendations to the Congress and the President as to the most
 effective methods of providing for the health care of permanent residents
 in the United States and as to legislation and matters of administrative
 policy concerning the USHealth Program,
 `(F) provide the Congress and the President with the ongoing actuarial
 and other analysis undertaken by the Administration with respect to the
 USHealth Program and any other information relating to such programs,
 `(G) conduct policy analysis and research relating to the USHealth
 Program, and
 `(H) conduct an education program for health care consumers and providers
 on the importance of holding down health care costs.
 `(4)(A) The Board may prescribe such rules and regulations as the Board
 determines necessary or appropriate to carry out the functions of the
 Administration. The regulations prescribed by the Board shall be subject
 to the rulemaking procedures established under section 553 of title 5,
 United States Code.
 `(B) The Board may establish, alter, consolidate, or discontinue such
 organizational units or components within the Administration as the Board
 considers necessary or appropriate to carry out its functions, except that
 this subparagraph shall not apply with respect to any unit, component,
 or position provided for by this title.
 `(C) The Board may, with respect to the administration of the USHealth
 Program assign duties, and delegate, or authorize successive redelegations
 of, authority to act and to render decisions, to such officers and employees
 as the Board may find necessary. Within the limitations of such delegations,
 redelegations, or assignments, all official acts and decisions of such
 officers and employees shall have the same force and effect as though
 performed or rendered by the Board.
 `(b) USHEALTH ADMINISTRATOR- (1) There shall be in the Administration a
 USHealth Administrator (in this part referred to as the `Administrator')
 who shall be appointed by the USHealth Board.
 `(2)(A) The Administrator shall be appointed for a term of five years,
 except that the individual first appointed to the office of Administrator
 shall be appointed for a term ending December 31, 1995. An individual
 appointed to a term of office as Administrator after the commencement
 of such term may serve under such appointment only for the remainder of
 such term. An individual may, at the request of the Chairman of the Board,
 serve as Administrator after the expiration of his or her term for not more
 than one year until his or her successor has taken office. An individual
 may be appointed as Administrator for additional terms.
 `(B) An individual may be removed from the office of Administrator before
 completion of his or her term only for cause found by the Board.
 `(3) The Administrator shall be compensated at the rate provided for level
 II of the Executive Schedule.
 `(4) The Administrator shall--
 `(A) constitute the chief operating officer of the Administration,
 responsible for administering, in accordance with applicable statutes and
 regulations, the USHealth Program,
 `(B) establish and maintain an efficient and effective operational structure
 for the Administration,
 `(C) devise and implement long-term plans to promote and maintain the
 effective implementation of the USHealth Program,
 `(D) make annual budgetary recommendations of the Administration for the
 ongoing administrative costs of the Administration and the program costs
 of the USHealth Program and defend such recommendations before the Board
 and before the appropriate Committees of each House of the Congress,
 `(E) advise the Board and the Congress on the effect on the administration
 of the Program of proposed legislative changes in the Program,
 `(F) serve as Secretary of the Board of Trustees of the USHealth Program
 Trust Fund, and
 `(G) report in December of each year to the Board for transmittal to the
 Congress concerning the administrative endeavors and accomplishments of
 the Administration.
Any reference to the Board in this title or any other provision of law in
connection with the exercise of a function of the Board which is delegated
to the Administrator pursuant to this section shall be considered a reference
to the Administrator.
 `(c) DEPUTY USHEALTH ADMINISTRATOR- (1) There shall be in the Office of the
 Administrator a Deputy USHealth Administrator (in this part referred to
 as the `Deputy Administrator'), who shall be appointed by the Board. The
 Deputy Administrator shall be appointed for a term coextensive with the
 term of the Administrator. An individual may be removed from the office of
 Deputy Administrator before completion of his or her term only for cause
 found by the Board.
 `(2) The Deputy Administrator shall be compensated at the rate provided
 for level III of the Executive Schedule.
 `(3) The Deputy Administrator shall perform such duties and exercise
 such powers as the Administrator shall from time to time assign or
 delegate. The Deputy Administrator shall be Acting Health Administrator
 during the absence or disability of the Administrator and, unless the
 Board designates another officer of the Government, in the event of a
 vacancy in the office of Administrator.
 `(d) GENERAL COUNSEL- (1) There shall be in the Administration a General
 Counsel, who shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the
 Board. The General Counsel shall be the principal legal officer in the
 Administration.
 `(2) The General Counsel shall be compensated at the rate provided for
 level IV of the Executive Schedule.
 `(e) INSPECTOR GENERAL- (1) There shall be in the Administration an Office
 of the Inspector General. Such Office shall be headed by an Inspector
 General appointed in accordance with the Inspector General Act of 1978.
 `(2) The Inspector General shall be compensated at the rate provided for
 level IV of the Executive Schedule.
 `(f) USHEALTH OMBUDSMAN- (1) There shall be in the Administration an
 Office of the USHealth Ombudsman, to be headed by a USHealth Ombudsman
 (in this part referred to as the `Ombudsman') appointed by the Board.
 `(2)(A) The Ombudsman shall be appointed for a term of 5 years, except that
 the individual first appointed to the office of Ombudsman shall be appointed
 for a term ending December 31, 1995. An individual appointed to a term of
 office as Ombudsman after the commencement of such term may serve under
 such appointment only for the remainder of such term. An individual may,
 at the request of the Chairman of the Board, serve as Ombudsman after the
 expiration of his or her term for not more than one year until his or her
 successor has taken office. An individual may be appointed as Ombudsman
 for additional terms.
 `(B) An individual may be removed from the office of Ombudsman before
 completion of his or her term only for cause found by the Board.
 `(3) The Ombudsman shall be compensated at the rate provided for level V
 of the Executive Schedule.
 `(4) The duties of the Ombudsman are--
 `(A) to represent within the Administration's decisionmaking process the
 interests and concerns of beneficiaries under the USHealth Program;
 `(B) to review the Administration's policies and procedures for possible
 adverse effects on such beneficiaries;
 `(C) to recommend within the Administration's decisionmaking process
 changes in policies which have caused problems for such beneficiaries;
 `(D) to help resolve the problems under the USHealth Program of individual
 beneficiaries in unusual or difficult circumstances as determined by the
 Administrator; and
 `(E) to represent within the Administration's decisionmaking process
 the views of beneficiaries in the design of forms and the issuance of
 instructions.
 `(5) The Board shall assure that the Office of the USHealth Ombudsman has
 staff sufficient to enable the Ombudsman to efficiently carry out his
 or her duties. Such staff shall be located in the regional offices and
 central office of the Administration.
 `(6) The annual report of the Board under section 1834 shall include a
 description of the activities of the Ombudsman.
`ADMINISTRATIVE DUTIES OF THE USHEALTH BOARD
 `SEC. 1833. (a) PERSONNEL- (1) The Board shall appoint such additional
 officers and employees as it considers necessary to carry out its
 functions. Except as otherwise provided in any other provision of law,
 such officers and employees shall be appointed, and their compensation
 shall be fixed, in accordance with title 5, United States Code.
 `(2) The Board may procure the services of experts and consultants in
 accordance with the provisions of section 3109 of title 5, United States
 Code.
 `(3) Notwithstanding any requirements of section 3133 of title 5, United
 States Code, the Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall
 authorize for the Administration a total number of Senior Executive Service
 positions which is greater than the number of such positions authorized
 in the Health Care Financing Administration in the Department of Health
 and Human Services as of immediately before the date of the enactment of
 the USHealth Program Act, to the extent that the greater number of such
 authorized positions is specified in the comprehensive work force plan as
 established and revised by the Board under subsection (b)(1). The total
 number of such positions authorized for the Administration pursuant to
 such section 3133 shall not at any time be less than the number of such
 authorized positions as of immediately before such date.
 `(4) In addition to the positions of the Administration in the Executive
 Schedule specified in section 1832, the Administration is authorized 10
 additional positions at level IV of the Executive Schedule and 10 additional
 positions at level V of the Executive Schedule.
 `(5) All authority and functions of the Office of Personnel Management
 under section 4703 of title 5, United States Code (relating to demonstration
 projects), to the extent such section relates to personnel or positions in
 the Administration, shall be exercised exclusively by the Board. The Board
 shall report annually to the Committee on Ways and Means, the Committee on
 Energy and Commerce, the permanent Select Committee on Aging, and the Select
 Committee on Children, Youth, and Families of the House of Representatives
 and the Committee on Finance, the Committee on Labor and Human Resources,
 and the Special Committee on Aging of the Senate on the demonstration
 projects undertaken by the Board pursuant to this paragraph.
 `(b) BUDGETARY MATTER- (1) Appropriations requests for staffing and personnel
 of the Administration shall be based upon a comprehensive work force plan,
 which shall be established and revised from time to time by the Board. The
 entire amount of appropriations provided for the administrative costs of
 the Administration shall be apportioned in the time period provided in
 title 31, United States Code, for apportionment and shall be apportioned
 for the entire period of availability without restriction or deduction by
 the apportioning officer or employee of the Office of Management and Budget
 or any other entity within the executive branch of the Federal Government,
 except as otherwise provided in this subsection.
 `(2) The report submitted pursuant to section 1834 shall include a section
 reflecting the use of budget authority provided to the Administration
 by quarters.
 `(3)(A) Authority of the Administration for automated data processing
 procurement and facilities construction shall be provided in the form of
 contract authority covering the total costs of such acquisitions, to be
 available until expended.
 `(B) Amounts necessary for the liquidation of contract authority provided
 pursuant to this paragraph are hereby made available from the USHealth
 Program Trust Fund to the extent that the Board, with the concurrence
 of the Secretary of the Treasury, determines that such amounts are not
 necessary to meet the current obligations for payments from the Trust Fund.
 `(C) Funds appropriated for the Administration to be available on a
 contingency basis shall be apportioned only upon the occurrence of the
 stipulated contingency, as determined by the Board and reported to each
 House of the Congress.
 `(c) SEAL OF OFFICE- The Board shall cause a seal of office to be made
 for the Administration of such design as the Board shall approve. Judicial
 notice shall be taken of such seal.
`REPORTS
 `SEC. 1834. The USHealth Administrator and the USHealth Board shall make
 full reports to Congress, within 120 days after the beginning of each
 regular session, of the administration of the functions with which they
 are charged under this Act. In addition to the number of copies of such
 reports authorized by other law to be printed, there is hereby authorized
 to be printed not more than 5,000 copies of each such report for use by
 the Board for distribution to Members of Congress and to State and other
 public or private agencies or organizations participating in or concerned
 with the USHealth Program.'.
 (b) DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS RELATING TO PERSONNEL MATTERS- As soon as
 practicable after the effective date of this subsection, the USHealth
 Board and the Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall, in
 consultation with the Comptroller General, jointly implement one or more
 demonstration projects under this subsection. Under each such project,
 for the period of its duration--
 (1) the Board may appoint, without regard to the provisions of title 5,
 United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, such
 technical and professional employees as the Board considers appropriate whose
 compensation may be fixed by the Board without regard to the provisions
 of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to
 classification and General Schedule pay rates, except that such employees
 may not be paid at a rate in excess of the rate payable for level IV of
 the Executive Schedule, and
 (2) the Director shall delegate to the Board (pursuant to section 1104 of
 title 5, United States Code, and subject to applicable limitations under such
 title relating to delegations under such section) functions relating to--
 (A) recruitment and examination programs for entry level employees, and
 (B) classification and standards development systems and pay ranges for
 those job categories identified by the Board in assuming such delegation.
The Comptroller General shall report to the Committee on Ways and Means,
the Committee on Energy and Commerce, the permanent Select Committee on
Aging, and the Select Committee on Children, Youth, and Families of the
House of Representatives and the Committee on Finance, the Committee on
Labor and Human Resources, and the Special Committee on Aging of the Senate
concerning such demonstration projects, together with any recommendations,
not later than July 1, 1992. Such report shall include an evaluation of
the readiness of the Board to assume permanent and full authority over the
functions described in paragraphs (1) and (2).
 (c) DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS RELATING TO DELEGATIONS FROM ADMINISTRATOR OF
 GENERAL SERVICES- As soon as practicable after the effective date of this
 subsection, the USHealth Board and the Administrator of General Services
 shall, in consultation with the Comptroller General, jointly implement
 one or more demonstration projects under this subsection. Under each such
 project, for the period of its duration, the Board shall have--
 (1) all authorities permitted to be delegated under the provisions of
 Federal law codified under title 40 of the United States Code, relating to
 the acquisition, operation, and maintenance of the facilities needed for
 the administration of programs for which the Board is given responsibility
 under the Social Security Act,
 (2) all authorities permitted to be delegated under section 111 of the
 Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (40 U.S.C. 759),
 relating to the lease, purchase, or maintenance of automated data processing
 equipment, and
 (3) the authority to contract for any automated data processing equipment
 or services which the Board considers necessary for the efficient and
 effective operation of such programs.
The Comptroller General shall report to the Committee on Ways and Means,
the Committee on Energy and Commerce, the permanent Select Committee on
Aging, and the Select Committee on Children, Youth, and Families of the
House of Representatives and the Committee on Finance, the Committee on
Labor and Human Resources, and the Special Committee on Aging of the Senate
concerning such demonstration projects, together with any recommendations,
not later than July 1, 1992. Such report shall include an evaluation of
the readiness of the Board to assume permanent and full authority over the
functions described in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3).
 (d) INTERIM AUTHORITY OF THE ADMINISTRATOR- The President shall nominate
 for appointment the initial members of the USHealth Board not earlier than
 July 1, 1989, and not later than July 1, 1992. In the event that, as of
 the effective date of the amendments made by subsection (a), all members of
 the USHealth Board have not been appointed, until all members of the Board
 have been appointed, the officer serving on the date of the enactment of
 this Act as Administrator of the Health Care Financing Administration in
 the Department of Health and Human Services (or Acting Administrator,
 if applicable), or such officer's successor, shall, while continuing
 to serve as Administrator (or Acting Administrator) of the Health Care
 Financing Administration in such Department, serve as head of the USHealth
 Administration established under section 1831 of the Social Security Act
 (as amended by this Act) and shall assume the powers and duties of such Board
 and of the USHealth Administrator under such Act (as amended by this Act).
SEC. 1602. TRANSFERS TO THE NEW USHEALTH ADMINISTRATION.
 (a) FUNCTIONS- There are transferred to the USHealth Administration all
 functions carried out by the Secretary of Health and Human Services with
 respect to the programs and activities the administration of which is
 vested in the Health Care Financing Administration. The USHealth Board
 shall allocate such functions in accordance with sections 1831, 1832,
 and 1833 of the Social Security Act (as amended by this Act).
 (b) PERSONNEL, ASSETS, ETC- (1) There are transferred from the Department
 of Health and Human Services to the USHealth Administration, for appropriate
 allocation by the USHealth Board in the USHealth Administration--
 (A) the personnel employed in connection with the functions transferred by
 this Act and the amendments made thereby, as considered appropriate by the
 Board in consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services, and
 (B) the assets, liabilities, contracts, property, records, and unexpended
 balance of appropriations, authorizations, allocations, and other funds
 employed, held, or used in connection with such functions, arising from
 such functions, or available, or to be made available, in connection with
 such functions.
 (2) Unexpended funds transferred pursuant to this subsection shall be
 used only for the purposes for which the funds were originally authorized
 and appropriated.
 (3) The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall terminate--
 (A) those positions in the Department of Health and Human Services
 placed in level IV of the Executive Schedule (or equivalent positions),
 other than positions specifically required under section 5315 of title 5,
 United States Code, or any other provision of law, attributable to the
 Health Care Financing Administration, and
 (B) those positions in such Department placed in level V of the Executive
 Schedule (or equivalent positions), other than positions specifically
 required under section 5316 of such title or any other provision of law,
 attributable to the Health Care Financing Administration.
 (c) ABOLISHMENT OF HEALTH CARE FINANCING ADMINISTRATION IN THE DEPARTMENT OF
 HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES- Effective upon the appointment of all initial
 members of the USHealth Board pursuant to section 1832 of the Social
 Security Act (as amended by this Act)--
 (1) the position of Administrator of the Health Care Financing Administration
 in the Department of Health and Human Services is abolished, and
 (2) section 1117 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1317) is repealed.
SEC. 1603. TRANSITIONAL RULES.
 (a) INTERIM AUTHORITY FOR APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION- After July 1, 1991--
 (1) any of the officers provided for in section 1832 of the Social Security
 Act (as amended by this Act) may be nominated and appointed, as provided
 in such section, and
 (2) the USHealth Board, upon nomination and appointment of all of the
 members thereof, may prescribe regulations providing for the orderly
 transfer of proceedings before the Secretary of Health and Human Services
 to the USHealth Board.
Funds available to any official or component of the Department of Health and
Human Services, functions of which are transferred to the USHealth Board or
the USHealth Administration by this Act, may be used to pay the compensation
and expenses of any officer appointed pursuant to this section until such
time as funds for that purpose are otherwise available.
 (b) CONTINUATION OF ORDERS, DETERMINATIONS, RULES, REGULATIONS, ETC- All
 orders, determinations, rules, regulations, permits, contracts, collective
 bargaining agreements, recognitions of labor organizations, certificates,
 licenses, and privileges--
 (1) which have been issued, made, promulgated, granted, or allowed to
 become effective, in the exercise of functions (A) which were exercised
 by the Secretary of Health and Human Services (or his delegate), and (B)
 which relate to functions which, by reason of this Act, the amendments
 made thereby, and regulations prescribed thereunder, are vested in the
 USHealth Board, and
 (2) which are in effect immediately before the effective date specified
 in section 1605(a),
shall (to the extent that they relate to functions described in paragraph
(1)(B)) continue in effect according to their terms until modified, terminated,
suspended, set aside, or repealed by such Board.
 (c) CONTINUATION OF PROCEEDINGS- The provisions of this Act (including the
 amendments made thereby) shall not affect any proceeding pending before the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services immediately before the effective date
 specified in section 1605(a) with respect to functions vested (by reason of
 this Act, the amendments made thereby, and regulations prescribed thereunder)
 in the USHealth Board, except that such proceedings, to the extent that
 they relate to such functions, shall continue before such Board. Orders
 shall be issued under any such proceeding, appeals taken therefrom, and
 payments shall be made pursuant to such orders, in like manner as if this
 Act had not been enacted, and orders issued in any such proceeding shall
 continue in effect until modified, terminated, superseded, or repealed by
 such Board, by a court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of law.
 (d) CONTINUATION OF SUITS- Except as provided in this subsection--
 (1) the provisions of this Act shall not affect suits commenced prior to
 the effective date specified in section 1605(a); and
 (2) in all such suits proceedings shall be had, appeals taken, and judgments
 rendered, in the same manner and effect as if this Act had not been enacted.
No cause of action, and no suit, action, or other proceeding commenced by or
against any officer in his official capacity as an officer of the Department
of Health and Human Services, shall abate by reason of the enactment of this
Act. Causes of action, suits, actions, or other proceedings may be asserted
by or against the United States and the Health Care Financing Administration,
or such official of such Administration as may be appropriate, and, in any
litigation pending immediately before the effective date specified in section
1605(a), the court may at any time, on its own motion or that of a party,
enter an order which will give effect to the provisions of this subsection
(including, where appropriate, an order for substitution of parties).
 (e) CONTINUATION OF PENALTIES- This Act shall not have the effect of
 releasing or extinguishing any criminal prosecution, penalty, forfeiture,
 or liability incurred as a result of any function which (by reason of this
 Act, the amendments made thereby, and regulations prescribed thereunder)
 is vested in the USHealth Board.
 (f) JUDICIAL REVIEW- Orders and actions of the USHealth Board in the exercise
 of functions vested in such Board under this Act (and the amendments made
 thereby) shall be subject to judicial review to the same extent and in
 the same manner as if such orders had been made and such actions had been
 taken by the Secretary of Health and Human Services in the exercise of
 such functions immediately before the effective date specified in section
 1605(a). Any statutory requirements relating to notice, hearings, action
 upon the record, or administrative review that apply to any function
 so vested in such Board shall continue to apply to the exercise of such
 function by such Board.
 (g) EXERCISE OF FUNCTIONS- In the exercise of the functions vested in the
 USHealth Board under this Act, the amendments made thereby, and regulations
 prescribed thereunder, such Board shall have the same authority as that
 vested in the Secretary of Health and Human Services with respect to
 the exercise of such functions immediately preceding the vesting of such
 functions in such Board, and actions of such Board shall have the same
 force and effect as when exercised by such Secretary.
 (h) OPERATION OF TRANSITIONAL RULES IN THE EVENT OF INTERIM AUTHORITY IN
 THE USHEALTH ADMINISTRATOR- For purposes of this section, in any case in
 which the powers and duties to be transferred to the USHealth Board are
 transferred to the USHealth Administrator (or acting USHealth Administrator)
 in the Department of Health and Human Services for an interim period pursuant
 to section 1601(d), the preceding provisions of this section shall apply
 with respect to the transfer of such powers and duties to and from such
 Administrator (or acting Administrator) pursuant to such section in the
 same manner and to the same extent as they would have applied to a direct
 transfer from the Secretary of Health and Human Services to the USHealth
 Board if all initial appointments to such Board had been made.
SEC. 1604. DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS.
 (a) CARE MANAGEMENT DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS-
 (1) The Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this section referred
 to as the `Secretary') shall conduct at least 5 (but not more than 10)
 demonstration projects to determine the relative effectiveness, cost, and
 impact on quality of long-term care of different models of providing and
 reimbursing of care management services under title XVIII of the Social
 Security Act.
 (2) Demonstration projects under this subsection shall--
 (A) each be conducted over a period of 3 years;
 (B) be conducted in sites which are chosen to be geographically diverse
 and include at least one rural site;
 (C) include testing the use of different types of agencies as long-term
 care management agencies and provide for selection of such types of agencies
 in consultation with the Comptroller General;
 (D) include care management services provided to the elderly, the disabled,
 and children;
 (E) include testing payment for care management services on a capitated
 basis; and
 (F) include testing methods of minimizing variation among care management
 teams and long-term care management agencies in eligibility and coverage
 determinations under title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
 (3) The Secretary shall provide for the evaluation of the projects on
 a concurrent basis and shall submit to the Congress, not later than 18
 months after the initiation of the projects and upon the completion of the
 projects, a report on the findings of the evaluation. The Secretary shall
 include in such reports recommendations for appropriate legislative changes.
 (4) There are authorized to be appropriated from the Federal Hospital
 Insurance Trust Fund for the 3-fiscal year period beginning with fiscal year
 1990, not to exceed $10,000,000 to carry out demonstration projects under
 this subsection and not to exceed $1,000,000 to carry out the evaluation
 of such projects under this subsection.
 (b) DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS FOR DAY HEALTH CARE-
 (1) The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall conduct at least 5
 (and no more than 10) demonstration projects to assess the coverage of
 day health care among the items and services covered under long-term care.
 (2) Demonstration projects under this subsection--
 (A) each be conducted and completed within 18 months of the date of the
 enactment of this Act;
 (B) be conducted in sites which are chosen to be geographically diverse
 and include at least one rural site;
 (C) be designed and conducted so as to produce reliable comparative data on
 the cost of long-term care with and without the addition of day health care;
 (D) be designed and conducted so as to develop reliable information on
 the adequacy of quality controls in the provision of day health care;
 (E) test the impact of providing day health care on the amount and quality
 of informal care provided; and
 (F) include the measurement of beneficiary and caregiver satisfaction with
 day health care received.
 (3) In this subsection:
 (A) The term `day health care' means the following items and services
 provided to a chronically ill individual (described in section 1861(mm)(2)(A)
 of the Social Security Act) by a day health care program under a plan of
 care described in section 1861(mm)(1) of such Act:
 (i) Nursing care provided by or under the supervision of a registered
 professional nurse.
 (ii) Physical, occupational, or speech therapy.
 (iii) Medical social services.
 (iv) Personal care services under the supervision of a registered nurse.
 (v) Planned therapeutic, social, physical, and educational activities.
 (vi) Transportation services from the individual's home to and from the
 program.
 (vii) Nutritional services, including at least one meal daily and nutritional
 counseling and education.
 (B) The term `day health care program' means a public agency or private
 organization (or a subdivision thereof) which--
 (i) is primarily engaged in providing services described in subparagraph
 (A) to chronically ill individuals in a group setting outside their homes
 on a less than 24-hour-a-day basis;
 (ii) provides for such services directly or under arrangements made by
 the agency or organization;
 (iii) maintains a multidisciplinary group of personnel, including at least
 a physician, registered nurse, professional social worker, appropriate
 rehabilitation professionals, and, as needed, a dietician, which provides
 (or supervises the provision of) such services and which establishes
 policies governing the provision of such services;
 (iv) maintains appropriate records on all individuals provided such services;
 (v) utilizes volunteers in its provision of such services;
 (vi) in the case of an agency or organization in any State in which State
 or applicable local law provides for the licensing of such agencies or
 organizations, is licensed pursuant to such law;
 (vii) has procedures for obtaining appropriate aid in medical emergencies;
 and
 (viii) meets other requirements as the Secretary may find necessary in
 the interest of the health and safety of individuals receiving services
 described in subparagraph (A) from such agency or organization.
 (4) The Secretary shall provide for the evaluation of the projects on a
 concurrent basis and shall submit to the Congress and the National Council
 on Quality Assurance an interim report on the findings of the evaluation
 one year after the date of the enactment of this Act and a final report on
 the finding of the evaluation upon the completion of the projects. Such
 evaluation shall include an analysis of the costs or cost savings, and
 the impact on quality of long-term care.
 (5) There are authorized to be appropriated from the Federal Hospital
 Insurance Trust Fund for the 2-fiscal year period beginning with fiscal year
 1990, not to exceed $5,000,000 to carry out demonstration projects under
 this subsection and not to exceed $1,000,000 to carry out the evaluation
 of such projects under this subsection.
 (6) The conduct or results of the projects under this subsection shall
 not affect any other studies or activities concerning the provision of
 day health care under the medicare program.
 (c) GENERAL AUTHORITY-
 (1) Payments under demonstration projects under this section may be made in
 advance or by way of reimbursement, as may be determined by the Secretary,
 and shall be made in such installments and on such conditions as the
 Secretary finds necessary to carry out the purpose of this section.
 (2) The Secretary may waive such requirements of title XVIII of the Social
 Security Act as may be required to carry out demonstration projects under
 this section.
SEC. 1605. EFFECTIVE DATES OF TITLE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (b), this title (and the
 amendments made by this title) shall take effect on July 1, 1991.
 (b) EXCEPTION- Sections 1603 and 1604 of this Act shall take effect on
 the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 1606. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT AND RELATED
PROVISIONS.
 (a) REFERENCES TO SECRETARY- (1) Sections 1121, 1122, 1123, 1124, 1126,
 1128, 1128A, part B of title XI and title XVIII of the Social Security
 Act are each amended--
 (A) by striking `Secretary of Health and Human Services' each place it
 appears and inserting `USHealth Board',
 (B) by striking `Department of Health and Human Services' each place it
 appears and inserting `USHealth Administration',
 (C) by striking, each place it appears, `Department' (but only if it is
 not immediately succeeded by the words `of Health and Human Services',
 and only if it is used in reference to the Department of Health and Human
 Services) and inserting `USHealth Administration'; and
 (D) by striking, each place it appears, each of the following words (but,
 in the case of any such word only if such word refers to the Secretary of
 Health and Human Services): `Secretary', `Secretary's', `his', `him', and
 `he', and inserting (in the case of the word `Secretary') `USHealth Board',
 (in the case of the word `Secretary's') `USHealth Board's', (in the case
 of the word `his') `USHealth Board's', (in the case of the word `him')
 `USHealth Board', and (in the case of the word `he') `USHealth Board'.
 (2) Section 1155 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1320c-4) is amended by inserting
 after `205(b)' the following: `, except that in applying such section any
 reference therein to the Secretary shall be considered a reference to the
 USHealth Board'.
 (3) Section 1872 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ii) is amended by inserting
 after `title II' the following: `, except that, in applying such provisions
 with respect to this title, any reference therein to the Secretary shall
 be considered a reference to the USHealth Board'.
 (4) Sections 1862(d)(3), 1869(b)(1), and 1869(c) of such Act and the last
 sentence of section 1876(c)(5)(B) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395y(d)(3),
 1395ff(b)(1), 1395ff(c), 1395m(c)(5)(B)) are amended by inserting after
 `section 205(g)' the following: `, except that, in so applying such sections,
 any reference therein to the Secretary shall be considered a reference to
 the USHealth Board'.
 (b) COMPENSATION OF OFFICIALS- Title 5, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by adding at the end of section 5313 the following new items:
 `Members, USHealth Board (7).
 `USHealth Administrator.';
 (2) by adding at the end of section 5314 the following new item:
 `Deputy USHealth Administrator.';
 (3) by adding at the end of section 5315 the following new items:
 `General Counsel, USHealth Administration.
 `Inspector General, USHealth Administration.
 `Additional officers, USHealth Administration (10).'; and
 (4) by adding at the end of section 5316 the following new items:
 `Ombudsman, USHealth Administration.
 `Additional officers, USHealth Administration (10).'.
 (c) INSPECTOR GENERAL PROVISIONS- The Inspector General Act of 1978 (5
 U.S.C. App.) is amended--
 (1) in section 2(1), by striking `and the Veterans' Administration' and
 inserting `the Veterans' Administration, and the USHealth Administration';
 (2) in section 9(a)(1), by striking `and' at the end of subparagraph (M),
 and by adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraph:
 `(O) of the USHealth Administration, the offices of the inspector general
 in the Health Care Financing Administration; and';
 (3) in section 11(1), by striking `or' after `Transportation' and inserting
 a comma, and by inserting after `Affairs,' the following: `or Chairman of
 the USHealth Board,'; and
 (4) in section 11(2), by striking `or' after `Transportation', and by
 inserting after `Veterans' Administration,' the following: `or the USHealth
 Administration,'.
SEC. 1607. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
 (a) REFERENCES TO THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES- Whenever
 any reference is made in any provision of law (other than this Act or
 a provision of law amended by this Act), regulation, rule, record, or
 document to the Department of Health and Human Services with respect such
 Department's functions under the USHealth Program under title XVIII of
 the Social Security Act, such reference shall be considered a reference
 to the USHealth Administration.
 (b) REFERENCES TO THE SECRETARY OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES- Whenever any
 reference is made in any provision of law (other than this Act or a provision
 of law amended by this Act), regulation, rule, record, or document to the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services with respect to such Secretary's
 functions under the USHealth Program, such reference shall be considered
 a reference to the USHealth Board.
 (c) REFERENCES TO OTHER OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES- Whenever any reference is
 made in any provision of law (other than this Act or a provision of law
 amended by this Act), regulation, rule, record, or document to any other
 officer or employee of the Department of Health and Human Services with
 respect to such officer or employee's functions under the USHealth Program,
 such reference shall be considered a reference to the appropriate officer
 or employee of the USHealth Administration.
TITLE VII--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SEC. 1701. REPEAL OF MEDICAID PROGRAM.
 Title XIX of the Social Security Act (relating to the medicaid program)
 is repealed.
SEC. 1702. GENERAL EFFECTIVE DATE AND SAVINGS PROVISION FOR MEDICARE AND
MEDICAID PROGRAMS.
 (a) GENERAL EFFECTIVE DATE- Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision,
 the amendments made by this subdivision shall apply to services furnished
 on and after January 1, 1994.
 (b) SAVINGS PROVISION- Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act
 and except as otherwise specifically provided in this Act, the amendments
 made by this Act shall not apply to services furnished under title XVIII,
 or under a State plan approved under title XIX, of the Social Security
 Act before January 1, 1994.
SEC. 1703. SELECT ADDITIONAL CONFORMING AND TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS TO TITLE
XVIII OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT.
 Title XVIII of the Social Security Act is amended as follows:
 (1) The heading of such title is amended to read as follows:
`TITLE XVIII--USHEALTH PROGRAM'.
 (2) The heading of part A of such title is amended to read as follows:
`PART A--ELIGIBILITY, BENEFITS, PAYMENT'.
 (3) Section 1861(w)(2) of such title (42 U.S.C. 1395x(w)(2)) is amended by
 striking `insured under part A' and all that follows through `title XIX'
 and inserting `entitled to benefits under this title'.
 (4) Section 1862 of such title (42 U.S.C. 1392y) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a), by striking `or part B',
 (B) in subsection (c), by striking `part B' and inserting `part A', and
 (C) in subsection (f), by striking `or part B'.
 (5) Section 1866(a)(1)(D) of such title (42 U.S.C. 1395cc(a)(1)(D)) is
 amended by striking `fiscal intermediary or carrier (for purposes of part
 A or part B, or both, of this title)' and inserting `carrier'.
 (6) Section 1869 of such title (42 U.S.C. 1395ff) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a), by striking `or part B'; and
 (B) in subsection (b)(1)--
 (i) by striking subparagraph (A),
 (ii) by amending subparagraph (B) to read as follows:
 `(A) whether he is entitled to benefits under section 1811, or', and
 (iii) by redesignating subparagraph (C) as subparagraph (B).
 (7) Sections 1870 and 1875 of such title (42 U.S.C. 1395gg, 1395ll)
 are repealed.
 (8) Section 1879 of such title (42 U.S.C. 1395pp) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a)(1), by striking `pursuant to an assignment under
 section 1842(b)(3)(B)(ii)' and `or part B',
 (B) in subsections (a)(2) and (b), by striking `such part A or part B'
 and inserting `part A',
 (C) in subsection (c), by striking `or part B',
and
 (D) in subsection (d), by striking `or section 1842(b)(3)(C) (when the
 determination is under part B)'.
 (9) Section 1880(a) of such title (42 U.S.C. 1395qq(a)) is amended by
 striking `sections 1814(c) and 1835(d)' and inserting `section 1814'.
 (10) Section 1881 of such title (42 U.S.C. 1395rr) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (b)(2)(A), by striking `part B of', and
 (B) in subsection (d)--
 (i) by striking `Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in section
 226 any' and inserting `Any', and
 (ii) by striking `parts A and B of' each place it appears.
 (11) Section 1883 of such title (42 U.S.C. 1395tt) is amended by striking
 subsection (e).
 (12) Section 1885 of such title (42 U.S.C. 1395vv) is repealed.
DIVISION B--TRANSITION AND SYSTEM-BUILDING PROVISIONS
TITLE I--MEDICAID EXPANSION TO COVER THE POOR
SEC. 2101. TRANSITIONAL EXPANSION OF MEDICAID ELIGIBILITY.
 (a) PHASED-IN COVERAGE OF ALL INDIVIDUALS WITH INCOMES BELOW 100 PERCENT
 OF POVERTY LEVEL- Title XIX of the Social Security Act is amended by
 redesignating section 1926 as section 1928 and by inserting after section
 1925 the following new section:
`ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENT
 `SEC. 1926. (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, as a
 condition of approval of a State plan under this title as of January 1,
 1990, the State plan must provide for medical assistance--
 `(1) effective during 1990, for each lawful resident of the State--
 `(A) who is under 18 years of age,
 `(B) whose income (as determined under section 1612 for purposes of the
 supplemental security income program) does not exceed 100 percent of the
 official poverty line (described in section 1905(p)(2)(A)), and
 `(C) whose resources (as determined under section 1613 for purposes of
 the supplemental security income program) do not exceed twice the maximum
 amount of resources that an individual may have and obtain benefits under
 that program;
 `(2) effective during 1991, for each lawful resident who is described in
 paragraph (1) or--
 `(A) whose income (as determined under section 1612 for purposes of the
 supplemental security income program) does not exceed 90 percent of the
 official poverty line (described in section 1905(p)(2)(A)), and
 `(B) whose resources (as determined under section 1613 for purposes of
 the supplemental security income program) do not exceed twice the maximum
 amount of resources that an individual may have and obtain benefits under
 that program; and
 `(3) effective after 1991, for each lawful resident--
 `(A) whose income (as determined under section 1612 for purposes of the
 supplemental security income program) does not exceed 100 percent of the
 official poverty line (described in section 1905(p)(2)(A)), and
 `(B) whose resources (as determined under section 1613 for purposes of
 the supplemental security income program) do not exceed twice the maximum
 amount of resources that an individual may have and obtain benefits under
 that program.
 `(b) The medical assistance furnished to individuals under subsection
 (a) shall, notwithstanding any other provision of this title, be the same
 amount, duration, and scope as the medical assistance made available to
 individuals described in section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i).
 `(c) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, there are appropriated from
 the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Funds such amounts as the Secretary
 determines to be required to make additional payments to States under
 section 1903(a) attributable to the provisions of this section.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect
 on January 1, 1990, without regard to whether or not regulations to carry
 out such amendments have been promulgated by such date.
TITLE II--PRIVATE HEALTH INSURANCE DEDUCTION FOR SELF-EMPLOYED
SEC. 2201. DEDUCTION FOR HEALTH INSURANCE COSTS OF SELF-EMPLOYED.
 (a) AMOUNT DEDUCTIBLE INCREASED TO 100 PERCENT- Paragraph (1) of section
 162(l) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to special rules for
 health insurance costs of self-employed individuals) is amended by striking
 `25 percent of'.
 (b) REPEAL OF SUNSET OF DEDUCTION- Subsection (l) of section 162 of such
 Code is amended by striking paragraph (5).
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- (1) The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to
 amounts paid or incurred after December 31, 1990, in taxable years ending
 after December 31, 1990.
 (2) The amendment made by subsection (b) shall apply to taxable years
 beginning after December 31, 1989.
 (d) SUBSEQUENT REPEAL- For provision repealing subsection (l) of section
 162 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, see section 1409(b)(2).
TITLE III--RURAL HEALTH CARE DEVELOPMENT
SEC. 2301. SPECIAL PAYMENT RULES FOR PAYMENT FOR RURAL MEDICAL PRACTICE,
RURAL NURSING FACILITIES, AND RURAL HOME HEALTH AGENCIES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Title XIX of the Social Security Act is amended--
 (1) in section 1902(a)(13)--
 (A) by striking `and' at the end of subparagraph (D),
 (B) by adding `and' at the end of subparagraph (E), and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 `(F) notwithstanding the previous provisions of this paragraph, for
 payment for certain services provided in rural areas in accordance with
 the methodology established under section 1927;'; and
 (2) by inserting after section 1926 the following new section:
`SPECIAL PAYMENT METHODOLOGY FOR RURAL HEALTH SERVICES
 `SEC. 1927. (a) MEDICAL PRACTICE PAYMENTS- (1) In establishing payment
 rates under the plan for rural medical practices (including physicians'
 professional services), the State plan must, consistent with the system
 developed under paragraph (2)--
 `(1) utilize a cost-of-doing business adjustment (which takes into account
 differences in physician cost, nurse cost, utilities, equipment, supplies,
 and capital costs between providers in rural areas and providers generally)
 in each payment category, and
 `(2) provide a separate adjustment, on a per payment basis, for rural
 providers to take into account factors, such as 24-hour, on-call capability
 and low volume in certain areas, necessary to assure access to services
 in rural areas.
 `(2)(A) The Secretary, jointly with the States and in consultation with
 primary care providers and consumers, shall develop an appropriate system
 to reduce the payment differential between urban and rural physicians,
 physician assistants, nurse practitioners, and other professional health
 personnel so as to provide a reasonable incentive for such practitioners
 to provide services in rural areas.
 `(B) Such a system shall provide--
 `(i) for payment for emergency or urgent visits at the same rates as apply
 to such visits at hospital emergency rooms, and
 `(ii) for payment for an after-office-hours phone call consultation for
 the purpose of determining whether the patient requires immediate care.
 `(b) RURAL NURSING FACILITIES- (1) Each State shall permit each nursing
 facility in a rural area to elect to receive payments for nursing facility
 services under the plan on the basis of a daily rate schedule established
 under paragraph (2).
 `(2) The Secretary, in consultation with States, nursing facilities, and
 consumers, shall design a schedule, to be established prospectively, for
 payment for nursing facility services under paragraph (1). Such schedule
 shall provide for appropriate adjustments in payment rates under the schedule
 to take into account the type of patient for whom payment is being made
 and shall provide for adjustments from time to time in payment rates to
 take into account changes in a cost-of-doing-business index (established
 by the Secretary), which takes into account the higher overhead costs and
 costs for stand-by capability associated with rural nursing facilities.
 `(c) HOME HEALTH AGENCIES- (1) Each State shall permit each home health
 agency in a rural area to elect to receive payments for home health services
 under the plan on the basis of a per visit rate established under paragraph
 (2).
 `(2) The Secretary, in consultation with States, home health agencies,
 and consumers, shall design a schedule, to be established prospectively,
 for payment for home health services under paragraph (1). Such schedule
 shall provide for adjustments from time to time in payment rates to take
 into account changes in a cost-of-doing-business index (established by the
 Secretary), which takes into account the higher overhead costs and costs
 for stand-by capability associated with rural home health agencies.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to
 services furnished on or after January 1, 1991, without regard to whether
 or not regulations have been promulgated to implement such amendments
 before such date.
SEC. 2302. COVERAGE OF SERVICES OF MEDICAL CARE ACCESS FACILITIES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1905(a) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1396d(a)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (20),
 (2) by redesignating paragraph (21) as paragraph (22), and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (20) the following new paragraph:
 `(21) medical services of a medical care access facility (as defined in
 section 1861(mm)(1)); and'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to
 services furnished on or after January 1, 1991, without regard to whether
 or not regulations have been promulgated to implement such amendments
 before such date.
SEC. 2303. PLACEMENT OF OFFICE OF RURAL HEALTH CARE IN THE OFFICE OF THE
SECRETARY OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES.
 Section 711(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 911(a)) is amended
 by inserting `in the Office of the Secretary' after `established'.
SEC. 2304. RURAL HEALTH SERVICES BLOCK GRANT.
 Title XIX of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300w et seq.) is
 amended by adding at the end the following new part:
`Part D--Rural Health Services Block Grant
`GRANTS TO STATES FOR RURAL HEALTH PLANNING
 `SEC. 1941. (a) To assist the States in comprehensive and continuing
 planning to improve the access of residents of rural areas to health
 services, the Secretary may make grants to States which have submitted
 for a fiscal year, and had approved by the Secretary for such fiscal year,
 State plans for comprehensive State rural health access planning.
 `(b) Each plan required under subsection (a) shall--
 `(1) describe how Federal and State programs applicable to rural areas
 in the State (including preventive, community health services, emergency
 medical services, immunization programs, occupational safety and health
 programs, sexually transmitted disease control programs, and maternal and
 child health programs) could be changed to improve access to such programs
 for residents of rural areas;
 `(2) set forth the goals, objectives, and priorities of the State regarding
 improving the access of residents of rural areas to health services; and
 `(3) identify the needs on which such goals, objectives, and priorities
 are based.
 `(c)(1) From the amounts appropriated under subsection (d) for a fiscal
 year and available for allotment under this subsection, the Secretary
 shall allot to each State an amount equal to the greater of--
 `(A) $100,000; and
 `(B) an amount which bears the same ratio to the available amounts for
 that fiscal year as the rural population of the State bears to the rural
 population of the United States.
 `(2)(A) From the amounts appropriated under subsection (d) for a fiscal
 year, 10 percent of such amounts shall be available to the Secretary
 to make additional grants to the States described in subparagraph (B)
 to assist such States in preparing the plan required by subsection (a).
 `(B) The States referred to in subparagraph (A) are States in which
 the average population density in rural areas is less than the average
 population density in rural areas of all States.
 `(d) For purposes of carrying out this section, there are authorized to
 be appropriated $20,000,000 for fiscal year 1990, $21,000,000 for fiscal
 year 1991, and $22,000,000 for fiscal year 1992.
`STATE COMPREHENSIVE RURAL EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
 `SEC. 1942. (a) For each fiscal year, beginning with fiscal year 1990,
 each State shall submit a State comprehensive rural emergency medical
 services plan to the Secretary. Each State plan under this subsection shall--
 `(1) specify the public or private entity which will designate trauma
 centers in the rural areas of the State;
 `(2) contain minimum standards and requirements for the designation of
 trauma centers by such entity, including standards and requirements for--
 `(A) the number and types of trauma patients for whom such centers must
 provide care in order to ensure that such centers will have sufficient
 experience and expertise to be able to provide quality care for victims
 of injury; and
 `(B) the resources and equipment needed by such centers;
 `(3) contain standards and requirements for the implementation of trauma
 care systems in rural areas of the State, including standards and guidelines
 for triage and transportation of trauma patients prior to care in a trauma
 center; and
 `(4) specify procedures for the accreditation and evaluation of trauma
 centers and trauma care systems in rural areas of the State.
 `(b)(1) From the amounts appropriated under subsection (d) for a fiscal
 year and available for allotment under this subsection, the Secretary
 shall allot to each State that submits a plan under subsection (a) an
 amount equal to the greater of--
 `(A) $1,000,000; and
 `(B) an amount which bears the same ratio to the available amounts for
 that fiscal year as the rural population of the State bears to the rural
 population of the United States.
 `(2)(A) From the amounts appropriated under subsection (d) for a fiscal
 year, 10 percent of such amounts shall be available to the Secretary
 to make additional grants to the States described in subparagraph (B)
 to assist such States in carrying out subsection (c).
 `(B) The States referred to in subparagraph (A) are States in which
 the average population density in rural areas is less than the average
 population density in rural areas of all States.
 `(c)(1) From the amounts paid to a State under subsection (b) for a fiscal
 year, the State shall use such amounts to pay the costs of planning,
 implementing, and monitoring the operation of trauma care systems in rural
 areas of the State. Each trauma care system supported with amounts made
 available under this paragraph shall meet the standards and requirements
 established under the State plan required by subsection (a).
 `(2) From the amounts paid to a State under subsection (b) for a fiscal
 year, a State may use not more than 50 percent to reimburse trauma
 centers in rural areas for such portions of the uncompensated trauma care
 expenditures (including transportation costs) of such centers as the State
 considers appropriate. To receive reimbursement for uncompensated trauma
 care expenditures under this paragraph, a trauma center shall be a center
 which meets the standards and requirements established by the State in
 accordance with the State plan.
 `(d) For purposes of carrying out this section, there are authorized to
 be appropriated $150,000,000 for fiscal year 1990, $156,000,000 for fiscal
 year 1991, and $160,000,000 for fiscal year 1992.
`DEFINITIONS
 `SEC. 1943. For purposes of this part:
 `(1) The term `rural population' means the residents of a State who live
 in a rural area.
 `(2) The term `rural area' means an area not within a standard metropolitan
 statistical area.'.
SEC. 2305. MEDICAL PRACTICE DEVELOPMENT GRANTS.
 Part D of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 329 et
 seq.) is amended by inserting after section 330 the following new section:
`RURAL HEALTH
 `SEC. 330A. (a) For purposes of this section:
 `(1) The term `rural health clinic' means an entity which either through
 its staff and supporting resources or through contacts or cooperative
 arrangements with other public or private entities provides primary health
 services for residents of the rural area it serves.
 `(2) The term `primary health services' means--
 `(A) services of physicians and, where feasible, services of physicians'
 assistants and nurse clinicians (including nurse practitioners, clinical
 nurse specialists, certified nurse midwives, and certified registered
 nurse anesthetists);
 `(B) diagnostic laboratory and radiologic services;
 `(C) preventive health services (including children's eye and ear
 examinations to determine the need for vision and hearing correction,
 perinatal services, well child services, and family planning services);
 `(D) emergency medical services;
 `(E) transportation services as required for adequate patient care;
 `(F) preventive dental services; and
 `(G) pharmaceutical services, as may be appropriate for particular centers.
 `(3) The term `rural area' means an area of a State not within a standard
 metropolitan statistical area.
 `(4) The term `frontier rural health clinic' means a rural health clinic--
 `(A) the service area of which has a population density of not more than
 6 residents per square mile; and
 `(B) which is located not less than a 1/2 hour drive by automobile from
 the limits of the nearest city or town of 2,500 or more inhabitants.
 `(5) The term `medically underserved rural populations' means the population
 of a rural area designated by the Secretary as an area with a shortage of
 personal health services or a population group in a rural area designated
 by the Secretary as a population group having a shortage of such services.
 `(b)(1) The Secretary may make grants to public and nonprofit private
 entities for--
 `(A) planning, constructing, equipping, supplying, and operating a rural
 health clinic (including a frontier rural health clinic or a rural health
 clinic which will serve a medically underserved rural population); and
 `(B) training the personnel at such clinic.
 `(2) The amount of a grant under paragraph (1) may not exceed $120,000.
 `(3) Not more than 25 percent of a grant under paragraph (1) may be used
 for operating a rural health clinic.
 `(4) A public or nonprofit private entity is eligible to receive a grant
 under paragraph (1) for a rural health clinic if such entity submits to
 the Secretary an application in such form, at such time, and containing
 such information and assurances as the Secretary may require by rule,
 including assurances that--
 `(A) such clinic will accept as patients Medicare and Medicaid recipients
 who reside in the service area of such clinic; and
 `(B) a State or local government within such service area will provide
 to such clinic an amount equal to 75 percent (25 percent in the case of
 a frontier rural health clinic or a rural health clinic which will serve
 a medically underserved rural population) of the grant.
 `(5) The Secretary may make grants under paragraph (1) of not more than
 $1,000 without regard to the matching funds requirement specified in
 paragraph (4)(B).
 `(c)(1) The Secretary may make grants to public and nonprofit private
 rural health clinics to assist such clinics--
 `(A) in purchasing equipment or supplies for such clinics; and
 `(B) in training the personnel of such clinics.
 `(2) A public or nonprofit private rural health clinic is eligible to receive
 a grant under paragraph (1) if such clinic submits to the Secretary an
 application in such form, at such time, and containing such information and
 assurances as the Secretary may require by rule, including assurances that--
 `(A) such clinic will accept as patients Medicare and Medicaid recipients
 who reside in the service area of such clinic; and
 `(B) such clinic will expand the primary health services provided at such
 clinic and provide 24-hour-a-day emergency medical services.
 `(d)(1) The Secretary may make grants to solo and small group medical
 practices which provide primary health services to medically underserved
 rural populations to assist such practices--
 `(A) in purchasing equipment and supplies for such practices; and
 `(B) in training the personnel of such practices.
 `(2) A solo or small group medical practice is eligible to receive a grant
 under paragraph (1) if such practice submits to the Secretary an application
 in such form, at such time, and containing such information and assurances
 as the Secretary may require by rule, including assurances that--
 `(A) such practice will accept as patients Medicare and Medicaid recipients
 who reside in the service area of such clinic; and
 `(B) such practice will expand its provision of primary health services
 and provide 24-hour-a-day emergency medical services.
 `(3) The amount of a grant under paragraph (1) to a solo or small group
 medical practice may not exceed $20,000 for the first year and $1,000 for
 each year thereafter.
 `(e) The Secretary may require a recipient of a grant under this section
 to provide documentation of training undertaken with such grant, including
 the results of any proficiency examinations taken as a part of such training.
 `(f)(1) For grants under subsections (b) and (c), there are authorized to
 be appropriated $20,000,000 for fiscal year 1990 and $30,000,000 for each
 of the fiscal years 1991 and 1992.
 `(2) For grants under subsection (d), there are authorized to be appropriated
 $6,000,000 for fiscal year 1990, $7,000,000 for fiscal year 1991, and
 $5,000,000 for fiscal year 1992.'.
SEC. 2306. RURAL HEALTH CARE RESEARCH PROJECTS.
 (a) SET-ASIDE FOR RESEARCH ON IMPROVING RURAL HEALTH CARE DELIVERY SYSTEMS-
 Section 308(i)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 242m(i)(1))
 is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 `(E) Of the amounts appropriated under this paragraph for any fiscal year,
 the Secretary shall make available not less than 5 percent for research
 under section 305 on improving rural health care delivery systems.'.
 (b) STUDY ON IMPROVEMENTS WITH RESPECT TO DATA FOR DESIGNATION OF MEDICALLY
 UNDERSERVED RURAL AREAS- The Secretary of Health and Human Services,
 acting through the Director of the National Center for Health Statistics,
 shall conduct a study for the purpose of determining the manner in which
 improvements can be made in the collection and analysis of data providing
 the basis for determinations to designate rural areas as medically
 underserved areas.
SEC. 2307. ALCOHOL, DRUG ABUSE, AND MENTAL HEALTH BLOCK GRANT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1916(d) of the Public Health Service Act (42
 U.S.C. 300x-4(d)) is amended by inserting after the first sentence the
 following: `Such description shall include an examination of the mental
 health care needs of residents of rural areas in the State and specify
 the amount of such payments that will be used to provide mental health
 services for such residents and the extent of such services in the preceding
 fiscal year.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect
 on January 1, 1990.
SEC. 2308. NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF MENTAL HEALTH.
 Section 519 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 290cc-1) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(a)' after the section designation; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(b)(1) The Secretary, acting through the Institute, shall conduct research
 on improving rural mental health delivery systems.
 `(2) There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out paragraph (1)
 $5,000,000 for fiscal year 1990, $5,000,000 for fiscal year 1991, and
 $5,000,000 for fiscal year 1992.'.
TITLE IV--DIRECT REIMBURSEMENT OF NURSE SPECIALISTS
SEC. 2401. DIRECT REIMBURSEMENT FOR NURSE SPECIALISTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Paragraph (17) of section 1905(a) of the Social Security
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(a)) is amended to read as follows:
 `(17) services furnished by a certified nurse-midwife (as defined in
 section 1861(gg)), certified registered nurse anesthetist (as defined in
 section 1861(bb)(2)), or nurse practitioner or clinical nurse specialist
 (as defined in section 1861(nn)(2)) which the nurse is legally authorized
 to perform under State law (or the State regulatory mechanism provided
 by State law), whether or not the nurse is under the supervision of,
 or associated with, a physician or other health care provider;'.
 (b) PAYMENT AMOUNTS RELATED TO MEDICARE PAYMENT AMOUNTS- Section 1902(a)(13)
 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(13)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of subparagraph (D),
 (2) by adding `and' at the end of subparagraph (E), and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 `(F) for payment for services described in section 1905(a)(17) in an amount
 equal to (or equal to a percentage of) the amount of payment provided
 under part B of title XVIII, and such a percentage may not vary based on
 the type of nurse described in section 1905(a)(17) furnishing the services;'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section apply to payments
 under title XIX of the Social Security Act for calendar quarters beginning on
 or after January 1, 1991, without regard to whether or not final regulations
 to carry out such amendment have been promulgated by such date.
TITLE V--HEALTH CARE PERSONNEL DEVELOPMENT
SEC. 2501. NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE CORPS SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM AND LOAN
REPAYMENT PROGRAM.
 Section 338G(b) of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 254q(b))
 is amended--
 (1) by striking `such sums as may be necessary'; and
 (2) by inserting before the period the following: `$15,000,000 for fiscal
 year 1990, $16,000,000 for fiscal year 1991, and $17,000,000 for fiscal
 year 1992.'.
SEC. 2502. SCHOLARSHIPS AND LOAN REPAYMENTS.
 Part D of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 329 et
 seq.) is amended by inserting after section 338I the following new section:
`RURAL AND URBAN HEALTH ASSISTANCE SCHOLARSHIPS AND LOAN REPAYMENTS
 `SEC. 338K. (a) Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of
 this section, the Secretary shall establish a program of scholarships and
 loan repayments to assure an adequate supply of trained health care personnel
 at medical facilities which serve medically underserved populations.
 `(b) The provisions of this subpart relating to the operation of the
 National Health Service Corps Scholarship Program and the National Health
 Service Corps Loan Repayment Program shall, except as inconsistent with
 this section, apply to the program established under subsection (a) in
 the same manner and to the same extent as such provisions apply to the
 National Health Service Corps Scholarship Program and the National Health
 Service Corps Loan Repayment Program.
 `(c) Individuals receiving assistance under this section shall not be
 considered a member of the National Health Service Corps while performing
 services in exchange for such assistance.
 `(d)(1) Not less than 40 percent of the individuals receiving assistance
 under this section (by type of health care personnel) shall be targeted
 for placement with medically underserved rural populations.
 `(2) Not more than one percent of the individuals receiving assistance
 under this section shall be placed at a medical facility of a Federal
 correctional institution.
 `(e) For purposes of this section:
 `(1) The term `health care personnel' includes primary care physicians
 (with emphasis on family practice), nurses, nurse practitioners, physician
 assistants, psychologists, clinical social workers, pharmacists, dentists,
 and other allied health professionals.
 `(2) The term `medical facility' has the meaning given to such term in
 section 332(a)(2), except that such term includes rural health clinics,
 medical care access facilities, and solo and small group medical practices.
 `(3) The term `medically underserved population' has the meaning given
 such term in section 330(b)(3).
 `(f) There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section
 $15,000,000 for fiscal year 1990, $20,000,000 for fiscal year 1991, and
 $22,000,000 for fiscal year 1992.'.
SEC. 2503. HEALTH CARE PERSONNEL TRAINING PROGRAMS.
 (a) SPECIAL HEALTH CARE CONDITIONS OF RURAL AREAS- Not later than January 1,
 1991, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall issue rules requiring
 that all persons receiving Federal financial assistance under the Public
 Health Service Act to operate programs for the training of health care
 personnel shall--
 (1) implement measures so that such training takes into account the special
 health care conditions of rural areas;
 (2) improve efforts to recruit, as students in such training programs,
 individuals who are likely to practice in medically underserved rural areas.
 (b) TRAINING HEALTH CARE PERSONNEL TO SERVE MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED
 RURAL POPULATIONS- Part F of title VII of the Public Health Service Act
 (42 U.S.C. 780 et seq.) is amended by inserting after section 788B the
 following new sections:
`GRANTS FOR TRAINING HEALTH CARE PERSONNEL TO SERVE MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED
RURAL POPULATIONS
 `SEC. 788C. (a) The Secretary may make grants to public or private nonprofit
 health or educational entities to assist such entities in developing and
 supporting training programs for health care personnel to increase the
 number of such personnel who serve medically underserved rural populations.
 `(b) For purposes of this section:
 `(1) The term `health care personnel' includes primary care physicians
 (with emphasis on family practice), nurses, nurse practitioners, physician
 assistants, psychologists, clinical social workers, pharmacists, dentists,
 and other allied health professionals.
 `(2) The term `medically underserved rural populations' has the meaning
 given such term in section 330A(a)(5).
 `(c) There are authorized to be appropriated $10,000,000 for fiscal year
 1990, $12,000,000 for fiscal year 1991, and $13,000,000 for fiscal year 1992.
`GRANTS FOR TRAINING MULTI-COMPETENT HEALTH CARE TECHNICIANS TO SERVE
MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED RURAL POPULATIONS
 `SEC. 788D. (a) The Secretary may make grants to public or private nonprofit
 health or educational entities to assist such entities in developing and
 supporting training programs to increase the number of multi-competent
 health care technicians who serve medically underserved rural populations.
 `(b) For purposes of this section:
 `(1) The term `medically underserved rural populations' has the meaning
 given such term in section 330A(a)(5).
 `(2) The term `multi-competent health care technicians' means individuals
 who are skilled by education or experience to perform a number of routine
 laboratory procedures and radiography (chest, extremities, and abdomen)
 and who are trained as emergency medical technicians.
 `(c) There are authorized to be appropriated $1,000,000 for fiscal year
 1990, $2,000,000 for fiscal year 1991, and $2,000,000 for fiscal year 1992.'.
SEC. 2504. AREA HEALTH EDUCATION CENTERS.
 Section 781 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 295g-1) is amended--
 (1) by adding after subsection (a)(2) the following new paragraph:
 `(3) In entering contracts under paragraphs (1) and (2) the Secretary shall
 give priority to projects targeted toward health professions which have
 an inadequate number of practitioners, either by speciality or geographic
 location.';
 (2) in subsection (d)(2)--
 (A) by striking `six' in subparagraph (C) and inserting `two';
 (B) by striking `and' in subparagraph (G);
 (C) by striking the period in subparagraph (H) and inserting `; and'; and
 (D) by inserting after subparagraph (H) the following new subparagraph:
 `(I) have a director who shall be appointed from the facility of a medical
 or osteopathic school participating in the center and who shall be at
 least a half-time tenured faculty member at such school.'; and
 (3) in the first sentence of subsection (h)(1), by striking `and $20,000,000'
 all that follows and inserting `$20,000,000 for fiscal year 1990, $21,000,000
 for fiscal year 1991, and $22,000,000 for fiscal year 1992'.
SEC. 2505. CONTINUING EDUCATION FOR NURSES IN RURAL AREAS.
 Subpart I of part A of title VIII of the Public Health Service Act (42
 U.S.C. 820 et seq.) is amended by adding after section 822 the following
 new section:
`CONTINUING EDUCATION FOR NURSES IN RURAL AREAS
 `SEC. 823. (a) The Secretary may make grants to and enter into contracts
 with public and nonprofit private schools of nursing and other public
 or nonprofit private entities to meet the costs of special projects to
 provide continuing education for nurses in rural areas through the use of
 satellite transmissions.
 `(b) For purposes of this section, the term `rural area' means an area of
 a State not within a standard metropolitan statistical area.'.
TITLE VI--MENTAL HEALTH CARE DEVELOPMENT
Subtitle A--Amendments to Public Health Service Act
SEC. 2601. RESEARCH AND DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS WITH RESPECT TO MENTAL HEALTH
OF ELDERLY INDIVIDUALS.
 (a) NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF MENTAL HEALTH- Section 519 of the Public Health
 Service Act, as added by section 2057 of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988
 (Public Law 100-690), is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(a) IN GENERAL- ' after `519.'; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(b) SET-ASIDES WITH RESPECT TO ELDERLY INDIVIDUALS-
 `(1) Of the amounts appropriated to carry out subsection (a) in excess of
 the amount appropriated for such purpose for fiscal year 1989, the Secretary,
 acting through the Director, shall reserve for programs of research on mental
 illness among elderly individuals not less than $8,000,000 for fiscal year
 1990, $16,000,000 for fiscal year 1991, and $24,000,000 for fiscal year 1992.
 `(2) Of the amounts reserved pursuant to paragraph (1), the Secretary
 shall reserve not less than 10 percent for research on the delivery of
 mental health services to elderly individuals.'.
 (b) NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON AGING- Section 444 of the Public Health Service
 Act (42 U.S.C. 285e-1) is amended by adding at the end the following
 new subsection:
 `(e)(1) Of the amounts appropriated to carry out this subpart in excess of
 the amount appropriated for such purpose for fiscal year 1989, the Director
 of the Institute, shall reserve for research on the mental health and
 psycho-social well-being of elderly individuals $4,000,000 for fiscal year
 1990, $8,000,000 for fiscal year 1991, and $12,000,000 for fiscal year 1992.
 `(2) Of the amounts reserved pursuant to paragraph (1), the Director of
 the Institute shall reserve not less than 10 percent for research on the
 delivery to elderly individuals of services with respect to the mental
 health and psycho-social well-being of such individuals.'.
 (c) ADMINISTRATION ON AGING- Section 431 of the Older Americans Act of
 1965 (42 U.S.C. 3037) is amended by adding at the end the following new
 subsection:
 `(d) For the purpose of grants under sections 421 and 422 for research,
 development, and demonstration projects with respect to the mental health
 of elderly individuals, there are authorized to be appropriated $2,000,000
 for fiscal year 1990, $4,000,000 for fiscal year 1991, and $6,000,000 for
 fiscal year 1992, in addition to the amounts authorized in subsection (a)
 for each of such fiscal years.'.
SEC. 2602. QUALITY ASSURANCE AND PROGRAM EFFECTIVENESS STUDY BY INSTITUTE
OF MEDICINE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting
 through the Administrator of the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health
 Administration, shall request the Institute of Medicine of the National
 Academy of Sciences--
 (1) to conduct a study for the purpose of determining methods for measuring
 and assuring the quality and effectiveness of mental health services
 and alcohol and drug abuse treatment services, as provided in various
 settings, including psychiatric hospitals, inpatient psychiatric units
 in general hospitals, nursing homes, community mental health centers,
 and other ambulatory care settings;
 (2) in carrying out the study, to develop, with respect to such methods,
 recommendations for providers of such services and recommendations for
 Federal and State agencies that administer programs that provide such
 services or provide financial assistance with respect to such services
 (including agencies involved in administering the programs established
 pursuant to titles XVIII and XIX of the Social Security Act, commonly
 known as Medicare and Medicaid, respectively); and
 (3) not later than 18 months after the date any contract is entered into
 pursuant to subsection (b), to complete the study and submit to the Congress
 the findings made as a result of the study.
 (b) CONTRACT AUTHORITY-
 (1) The Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through the
 Administrator of the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration,
 may enter into a contract with the Institute of Medicine of the National
 Academy of Sciences with respect to carrying out the study requested
 pursuant to subsection (a).
 (2) The authority to enter into a contract under paragraph (1) shall be
 effective only to the extent of amounts made available in appropriations
 Acts.
 (c) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- For the purpose of the contract
 authorized in subsection (b), there is authorized to be appropriated
 $500,000 for fiscal year 1990.
SEC. 2603. ADDITIONAL STUDIES ON MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting
 through the Administrator of the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health
 Administration, shall provide for the following studies, and for a report
 to the Congress on each such study by not later than January 1, 1991:
 (1) PREPAID HEALTH PLANS- A study comparing the amount of, access to,
 and quality of, mental health services under prepaid-health plans and in
 settings other than prepaid health plans.
 (2) MENTAL HEALTH FACILITIES- A study examining mechanisms for ensuring
 quality of, and access to, mental health services delivered by State and
 local mental health facilities and by independent providers of mental
 health services.
 (3) MINORITY ACCESS TO COMMUNITY MENTAL HEALTH CENTERS- A study examining
 the representation of racial and ethnic minorities among persons receiving
 community mental health center services, including the current level of
 utilization and the level of unmet present and future needs.
 (4) MENTAL HEALTH MANPOWER- A study examining--
 (A) the adequacy of manpower for meeting present and future mental health
 needs of the elderly, and
 (B) the optimal utilization of the various types of mental health
 professionals for meeting those present and future elderly mental health
 needs.
 (5) MINORITY MANPOWER AND TRAINING- A study examining the adequacy of--
 (A) manpower for meeting present and future mental health needs of elderly
 who are members of racial or ethnic minorities, and
 (B) opportunities for training mental health professionals who are members
 of racial or ethnic minorities.
In addition, in conjunction with the study under paragraph (3), the Secretary
of Health and Human Services is authorized to conduct demonstration projects
to determine how to increase utilization of community mental health center
services by individuals in racial and ethnic minorities.
 (b) USE OF INSTITUTE OF MEDICINE- The Secretary of Health and Human
 Services--
 (1) shall request the Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of
 Sciences to conduct the study described in subsection (a)(1), and
 (2) if the Institute accepts such request, may enter into a contract with
 the Institute to carry out such study.
The authority to enter into a contract under this subsection shall be
effective only to the extent of amounts made available in appropriations Acts.
 (c) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- For purposes of carrying out the
 studies under this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such
 sums as may be necessary.
SEC. 2604. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 This subtitle and the amendments made by this subtitle shall take effect
 October 1, 1989, or upon the date of the enactment of this Act, whichever
 occurs later.
Subtitle B--Changes in Medicare and Medicaid Programs
SEC. 2611. REQUIRING PROVISION OF OUTPATIENT MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES UNDER
THE MEDICAID PROGRAM.
 Section 1905(a)(5) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(a)(5)) is
 amended by striking `and' before `(B)' and by adding before the semicolon
 at the end the following: `, and (C) outpatient mental health services
 (described in section 1812(a)(10)) whether furnished in a clinic, the
 patient's home, a nursing facility, or elsewhere, to the extent such
 services would be described in clause (A) if furnished by a physician
 (as defined in section 1861(r)(1))'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATES-
 (1) The amendment made by subsection (a) applies (except as provided under
 paragraph (2)) to payments under title XIX of the Social Security Act for
 calendar quarters beginning on or after January 1, 1990, without regard
 to whether or not final regulations to carry out such amendment have been
 promulgated by such date.
 (2) In the case of a State plan for medical assistance under title XIX of
 the Social Security Act which the Secretary of Health and Human Services
 determines requires State legislation (other than legislation appropriating
 funds) in order for the plan to meet the additional requirement imposed by
 the amendment made by subsection (a), the State plan shall not be regarded
 as failing to comply with the requirements of such title solely on the
 basis of its failure to meet this additional requirement before the first
 day of the first calendar quarter beginning after the close of the first
 regular session of the State legislature that begins after the date of the
 enactment of this Act. For purposes of the previous sentence, in the case
 of a State that has a 2-year legislative session, each year of such session
 shall be deemed to be a separate regular session of the State legislature.
SEC. 2612. CLASSIFICATION OF INSTITUTION FOR MENTAL DISEASES UNDER MEDICAID.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Subsection (i) of section 1905 of the Social Security
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d), as inserted by section 411(k)(14) of the Medicare
 Catastrophic Coverage Act of 1988, is amended to read as follows:
 `(i)(1) The term `institution for mental diseases' means only an institution
 that has more than 16 beds and that--
 `(A) is under the jurisdiction of the State's mental health authority,
 `(B) advertises itself as primarily specializing in the treatment of
 individuals with mental disease, or
 `(C) based upon current diagnoses, less than 50 percent of all patients
 in the institution have a physical condition which in itself requires the
 level of services furnished in a nursing facility.
 `(2) The fact that an institution provides mental health services
 or psychopharmacological drugs to patients with physical conditions
 independently sufficient to require the level of services furnished in a
 nursing facility shall not be considered an indication that an institution
 is an institution for mental diseases.
 `(3) The fact that there are staff persons with specialized psychiatric
 or psychological training in an institution shall not be considered an
 indication that an institution is an institution for mental diseases.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect
 on January 1, 1990.
SEC. 2613. CONDITIONS OF PARTICIPATION FOR NURSING FACILITIES UNDER MEDICARE
AND MEDICAID PROGRAMS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Sections 1819(b)(4)(A) and 1919(b)(4)(A) of the Social
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i-3(b)(4)(A), 1396r(b)(4)(A)) are each amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of clause (v),
 (2) by striking the period at the end of clause (vi) and inserting `;
 and', and
 (3) by inserting after clause (vi) the following new clause:
 `(vii) access to medically necessary mental health services.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section to sections 1819
 and 1919 of the Social Security Act shall take effect as if included in
 the enactment of sections 4201 and 4211, respectively, of the Omnibus
 Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987.
SEC. 2614. ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS OF PARTICIPATION FOR MENTAL HEALTH PROVIDERS.
 (a) UNDER THE MEDICARE AND MEDICAID PROGRAMS- Part A of title XI of the
 Social Security Act is amended by adding at the end the following new
 section:
`CONDITIONS OF PARTICIPATION OF CERTAIN MENTAL HEALTH PROVIDERS UNDER THE
MEDICARE AND MEDICAID PROGRAMS
 `SEC. 1142. (a) In addition to any other conditions established for the
 participation of mental health providers (as defined in subsection (b))
 under title XVIII or under a State plan approved under title XIX, the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services shall provide for imposition of
 the following conditions:
 `(1) Each mental health provider shall comply with the consumer bill of
 rights established under subsection (b).
 `(2) Each mental health provider shall provide each individual receiving
 mental health services with written grievance procedures appropriate for
 the services and with written notice of the services to be provided.
 `(3) Each mental health provider shall have--
 `(A) the capability to identify clients who may be in need of mental
 health services,
 `(B) the capability to provide such services or to make appropriate
 referrals for such services, and
 `(C) the means to coordinate with other agencies, programs, and services
 providing mental health services or other services to individuals.
 `(4) Each such provider shall--
 `(A) include in the provider's assessment, an assessment of mental health
 needs at a level sufficient to identify individuals for whom a comprehensive
 mental health assessment, conducted by a mental health professional,
 is indicated,
 `(B) provide or arrange for such comprehensive mental health assessment,
 when indicated, and
 `(C) when indicated, include mental health services in individual's plan
 of care and discharge planning.
 `(5) Each mental health provider shall have--
 `(A) client care processes which include a plan of care which states
 reasonable goals and objectives, the services to be provided to meet those
 objectives, and outcome measures for each individual served,
 `(B) a method for periodic review of client needs and the plan of care, and
 `(C) a statement of criteria for discharge or transfer to another agency,
 program, or services.
 `(6) Each mental health provider which is an institution for mental diseases
 (as defined in section 1905(i)) shall establish, for each individual provided
 mental health services by the provider and before discharge, a discharge plan
 which assures that the individual will have a plan for appropriate mental
 health care and for coordination of services established before discharge.
 `(b) For purposes of this section, the Secretary shall establish a consumer
 bill of rights for individuals receiving mental health services and related
 support services under this Act which ensures that, with respect to such
 services, each such individual--
 `(A) will receive appropriate treatment and related services in a
 safe setting and under conditions that are humane and supportive of the
 individual's personal liberty (especially in the areas of confidentiality
 of a person's records) and that permit and assist the exercise of the
 civil rights of the individual;
 `(B) is afforded conditions of privacy in treatment, care, communications
 and all daily activities;
 `(C) is free from physical or mental abuse, exploitation, corporal
 punishment, inappropriate seclusion, and any physical or chemical restraints
 imposed for purposes of discipline or convenience and not required to
 treat the individual's medical or psychological symptoms;
 `(D) will, except in the case of emergencies, be restrained only on the
 written order of an appropriate mental health professional and only as
 required to ensure physical safety;
 `(E) will receive the services according to an individualized, written,
 treatment plan (developed promptly after admission of the individual to a
 treatment program), which plan is periodically revised as appropriate after
 periodic reassessment of the treatment-related needs of the individual,
 including any revisions necessary to provide a description of mental
 health services that may be needed after the individual is discharged from,
 or otherwise terminates care with, the provider;
 `(F) will upon discharge or termination of care from such a provider be
 referred as appropriate to other providers of mental health services;
 `(G) will be informed as to whether services and treatment are covered by
 health insurance, medical assistance or other sources and will receive
 an itemized copy of charges and an advance notice detailing changes in
 services or charges;
 `(H) will be promptly notified of the acceptance or denial of treatment
 and services and the reasons for denial, will receive reasonable notice
 if treatment, care, or services are to be reduced or terminated, and will
 receive such assistance as may be necessary to assure a smooth transition
 in services consistent with the welfare of the individual;
 `(I) will be afforded grievance procedures if the individual is dissatisfied
 with the provision of services, including, as appropriate, an impartial
 grievance procedure provided for or by the provider;
 `(J) will receive treatment, care, and services from individuals who
 are properly trained and competent to perform their duties in accordance
 with law;
 `(K) will, according to the capabilities of the individual, be permitted
 ongoing participation in the planning of the mental health services to be
 provided the individual (including participation in the development and
 periodic revision of the plan of care described in subparagraph (E));
 `(L) will, in terms and language appropriate to the individual's cultural
 background and ability, be provided with a reasonable explanation of
 the mental and physical condition of the individual, the objectives of
 treatment, the nature and significant possible adverse effects of recommended
 treatments, the reasons for the choice of a particular treatment, and
 appropriate alternative treatments, services, and types of providers of
 mental health services;
 `(M) will receive a particular treatment only upon the individual's informed
 and voluntary written consent, except in the case of an emergency situation
 in which the treatment is documented by a written order of an appropriate
 mental health professional as necessary for the immediate safety and
 welfare of the individual or as permitted under applicable State law if
 the individual is committed by a court to the provider;
 `(N) will be informed fully of the provider's assessment of the individual's
 condition upon request, unless contraindicated by documentation by the
 mental health professional in the individual's record that such access would
 be detrimental to the individual's health, in which case the material may
 then be made available to a similarly licensed health professional selected
 by the individual and this health professional may, in the exercise of
 professional judgment, provide the individual with access to any or all
 parts of this material; and
 `(O) will, if the individual is admitted on a residential or inpatient care
 basis, be permitted to converse with others privately, to have convenience
 and reasonable access to the telephone, mails, and to see visitors during
 regularly scheduled hours.
 `(c) In this section, the term `mental health provider' means--
 `(1) a psychiatrist, psychologist, clinical social worker, or psychiatric
 nurse specialist,
 `(2) a psychiatric hospital,
 `(3) a hospital program described in section 1861(ff)(3), and
 `(4) an institution for mental diseases (as defined in section 1905(i)).'.
 (b) ASSURING PRE-PAID ORGANIZATIONS PROVIDE QUALITY, ACCESSIBLE MENTAL
 HEALTH SERVICES UNDER THE MEDICAID PROGRAM- Section 1903(m)(2)(A) of the
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1396b(m)(2)(A)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of clause (vii),
 (2) by striking the period at the end of clause (viii) and inserting `;
 and', and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new clause:
 `(ix) if the services provided under the contract include outpatient mental
 health services, such contract provides for an appropriate mechanism for
 ensuring the quality of, and access to, such services.'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall be effective
 for services provided on or after January 1, 1991.
SEC. 2615. PEER REVIEW OF MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES.
 The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall provide, in contracts
 entered into with utilization and quality control peer review organizations
 under part B of title XI of the Social Security Act, for appropriate review
 by such organizations of mental health services for which payment is made
 under title XVIII or XIX of such Act.
SEC. 2616. REVIEW OF LEVELS OF PAYMENT FOR MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES.
 The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall review the levels of
 reimbursement for nursing facility services under the medicare program to
 ensure that reasonable amounts are available for the provision of mental
 health services through nursing facilities under such programs.
TITLE VII--ALZHEIMER'S ASSISTANCE DEVELOPMENT
Subtitle A--Grants to States for Alzheimer's Disease Programs
SEC. 2701. GRANTS TO STATES FOR ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE PROGRAMS.
 Title III of the Public Health Service Act is amended by inserting after
 section 316 the following new section:
`SEC. 316A. PROVISION BY STATES OF CERTAIN SERVICES RELATING TO ALZHEIMER'S
DISEASE OR RELATED DISORDERS.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM- The Secretary shall make grants to States
 to plan, establish, and operate programs to--
 `(1) coordinate the development and operation by public and private
 organizations of diagnostic, treatment, care management, respite care, legal
 counseling, and education services provided within the State to individuals
 with Alzheimer's disease or related disorders and to the families and care
 providers of such individuals, which organizations include the Veterans'
 Administration, the Alzheimer's disease centers established pursuant to
 section 901, and organizations representing such individuals and such
 families;
 `(2) provide home health care, personal care, day care, companion services,
 short-term care in health facilities, and other respite care to individuals
 with Alzheimer's disease or related disorders;
 `(3) provide to health care providers, to individuals with Alzheimer's
 disease or related disorders, to the families of such individuals, to
 organizations established for such individuals and such families, and to
 the general public, information with respect to--
 `(A) diagnostic services, treatment services, and related services available
 to such individuals and to the families of such individuals;
 `(B) sources of assistance in obtaining such services, including assistance
 under entitlement programs; and
 `(C) the legal rights of such individuals and such families;
 `(4) coordinate the development and operation of training programs and
 continuing education programs for health care providers on the diagnosis,
 treatment, and care management of Alzheimer's disease and related disorders;
 `(5) review State policies on the financing of and reimbursement of
 the costs of health care (including respite care) for individuals with
 Alzheimer's disease or related disorders, review State nursing home and
 home monitoring regulations that apply to such individuals, and identify
 policy changes that can improve the care provided to such individuals; and
 `(6) coordinate with any Federal programs relating to Alzheimer's disease
 or related conditions.
 `(b) RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF FUNDS-
 `(1) Amounts provided under a grant under subsection (a) may not be used to--
 `(A) make cash payments to individuals with Alzheimer's disease or related
 disorders or to the families of such individuals; or
 `(B) to purchase or improve real property (other than minor remodeling
 of existing improvements to real property) or to purchase major medical
 equipment.
 `(2) Not less than 25 percent, and not more than 50 percent, of a grant
 under subsection (a) may be used in any fiscal year to provide respite care.
 `(c) DURATION OF GRANT- A grant made under subsection (a) shall be made
 for 3 years, subject to annual evaluation by the Secretary.
 `(d) AMOUNT OF GRANT- The amount of a grant under subsection (a) may not--
 `(1) be less than $250,000; and
 `(2) exceed one-half of the costs of the program for which the grant is made.
 `(e) REQUIREMENT OF APPLICATION- The Secretary may not make a grant under
 subsection (a) unless--
 `(1) an application for the grant is submitted to the Secretary;
 `(2) with respect to carrying out the purpose for which the grant is to
 be made, the application provides assurances of compliance satisfactory
 to the Secretary; and
 `(3) the application otherwise is in such form, is made in such manner,
 and contains such agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary
 determines to be necessary to carry out such subsection.
 `(f) EVALUATIONS BY SECRETARY- The Secretary shall annually evaluate
 programs for which grants are made under subsection (a) and may contract
 with private entities to conduct such evaluation. For any evaluation in
 the first year of any such program the amount of the evaluation contract
 may not exceed 2 percent of the amount of the grant made for the program.
 `(g) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- For the purposes of carrying out this
 section, there are authorized to be appropriated $50,000,000 for fiscal
 year 1990, $100,000,000 for fiscal year 1991, and $125,000,000 for fiscal
 year 1992.
Subtitle B--Improvement of Services under Medicare and Medicaid Programs
SEC. 2711. ASSURING ADEQUATE FUNDING FOR TREATMENT OF INDIVIDUALS WITH
ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE OR RELATED DISORDERS.
 (a) MEDICARE- Not later than 12 months after the date of the enactment
 of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services (hereafter in
 this subtitle referred to as the `Secretary') shall review the levels of
 reimbursement provided under title XVIII of the Social Security Act for home
 health services, extended care services, and inpatient hospital services
 for medicare beneficiaries in an advanced stage of Alzheimer's disease
 or a related disorder. To the extent that such levels do not accurately
 reflect the reasonable amounts required to provide adequately for services
 furnished to such patients, the Secretary shall, not later than 18 months
 after the date of the enactment of this Act, adjust such levels accordingly.
 (b) MEDICAID- Each State with a State plan approved under title XIX of
 the Social Security Act shall report to the Secretary, not later than 12
 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, on how the levels of
 reimbursement under the plan for home health services, nursing facility
 services, inpatient hospital services, and community-based care take into
 account the special needs of medicaid beneficiaries in an advanced stage
 of Alzheimer's disease or a related disorder.
SEC. 2712. UPGRADING QUALITY OF CARE REVIEWS FOR HEAVY CARE PATIENTS.
 (a) MEDICARE- The Secretary shall modify contracts with utilization and
 quality control peer review organizations under part B of title XI of the
 Social Security Act in a manner that ensures that such organizations conduct
 adequate and representative quality of care reviews on patients (such as
 patients in an advanced stage of Alzheimer's disease or a related disorder)
 who require intensive home health services or extended care services.
 (b) MEDICAID- As a condition of approval of a State plan under title XIX of
 the Social Security Act, on or after January 1, 1990, a State must provide
 assurances satisfactory to the Secretary that the State is providing for
 the conduct (by peer review organizations or other qualified organizations)
 of adequate and representative quality of care reviews on patients (such as
 patients in an advanced stage of Alzheimer's disease or a related disorder)
 who require intensive home health services, nursing facility services,
 or other long-term care services.
SEC. 2713. ASSURING ACCESS TO NEEDED SERVICES.
 (a) REVIEW- The Secretary shall review the practices of home health agencies,
 skilled nursing facilities, and intermediate care facilities participating
 under the medicare or medicaid program with respect to whether they limit
 or restrict the home health services or nursing facility services they
 provide to individuals with Alzheimer's disease or a related disorder.
 (b) REPORT- Not later than 12 months after the date of the enactment of
 this Act, the Secretary shall report to the Congress on the results of
 such review and shall include in the report findings as to whether access
 of Alzheimer disease patients to necessary home health services or nursing
 facility services is being restricted and, if so, appropriate changes that
 should be made in the law or regulations to prevent such restrictions.
TITLE VIII--COMMUNITY AND MIGRANT HEALTH CENTERS EXPANSION
SEC. 2801. MIGRANT HEALTH CENTERS; COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTERS.
 (a) MIGRANT HEALTH CENTERS- Section 329(h) of the Public Health Service Act
 (42 U.S.C. 254b(h)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)(A), by striking `and such sums' and all that follows
 and inserting the following: `, $53,350,000 for fiscal year 1990, and such
 sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 1991.'; and
 (2) in paragraph (2)(A), by striking `$2,000,000' and all that follows and
 inserting the following: `$2,200,000 for fiscal year 1990, and $2,750,000
 for fiscal year 1991.'.
 (b) COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTERS- Section 330(g) of the Public Health Service
 Act (42 U.S.C. 254c(g)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)(A), by striking `and such sums' and all that follows
 and inserting the following: `, $484,000,000 for fiscal year 1990, and
 such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 1991.'; and
 (2) in paragraph (2)(A), by striking `$30,000,000' and all that follows and
 inserting the following: `$33,000,000 for fiscal year 1990, and $38,500,000
 for fiscal year 1991.'.