S 1261 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1261
To amend the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to clarify the burden of proof for
unlawful employment practices in disparate impact cases, and for other
purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
June 23 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. METZENBAUM (for himself, Mr. JEFFORDS, Mr. KENNEDY, Mr. ADAMS, Mr. SIMON,
Ms. MIKULSKI, Mr. GORE, Mr. LAUTENBERG, Mr. DODD, Mr. HATFIELD, Mr. PELL,
and Mr. MATSUNAGA) introduced the following bill; which was read twice and
referred to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources
A BILL
To amend the Civil Rights Act of 1964 to clarify the burden of proof for
unlawful employment practices in disparate impact cases, and for other
purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Fair Employment Reinstatement Act.
SEC. 2. PROOF OF UNLAWFUL EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES IN DISPARATE IMPACT CASES.
 Section 703 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000e-2) is amended
 by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(k) Proof of Unlawful Employment Practices in Disparate Impact Cases-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In an action or proceeding under this title, an unlawful
 employment practice is established when--
 `(A) a complaining party demonstrates that an employment practice results in
 a disparate impact on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, or national
 origin, and the respondent fails to demonstrate that such practice is
 required by business necessity; or
 `(B) a complaining party demonstrates that a group of employment practices
 results in a disparate impact on the basis of race, color, religion, sex,
 or national origin, and the respondent fails to demonstrate that such
 practices are required by business necessity: Provided, That--
 `(i) if the complaining party demonstrates that a group of employment
 practices results in a disparate impact, such party shall not be required to
 demonstrate which specific practice or practices within the group resulted
 in such disparate impact; and
 `(ii) if the respondent demonstrates that a specific employment practice
 within the group of employment practices does not contribute to the
 disparate impact, the respondent shall not be required to demonstrate that
 such practice is required by business necessity.
 `(2) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this subsection--
 `(A) the term `complaining party' means a person who may bring an action
 or proceeding under this title;
 `(B) the term `respondent' means an employer, employment agency, labor
 organization, or joint labor-management committee;
 `(C) the term `demonstrates' means meets the burdens of production and
 persuasion;
 `(D) the term `required by business necessity' means essential to effective
 job performance; and
 `(E) the term `group of employment practices' means a combination of
 employment practices or an overall employment process.'.