HR 1656 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 1656
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 to exempt from tax earnings on
certain investment accounts for savers and investors.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
April 3, 1989
Mr. JENKINS introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Ways and Means
A BILL
To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 to exempt from tax earnings on
certain investment accounts for savers and investors.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Savers and Investors Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. TAX DEFERRED ACCOUNTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1954 (relating to items specifically excluded from gross income)
 is amended by redesignating section 134 as section 135 and by inserting
 after section 133 the following new section:
`SEC. 134. TAX DEFERRED ACCOUNTS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Any tax deferred account is exempt from taxation under
 this subtitle except for the taxes imposed by section 511 (relating to
 imposition of tax on unrelated business income).
 `(b) TAX DEFERRED ACCOUNT- For purposes of this section, the term `tax
 deferred account' means a trust created or organized in the United States
 for the exclusive benefit of an individual or his beneficiaries, but only
 if the written governing instrument creating the trust meets the following
 requirements:
 `(1) No contribution will be accepted by the trust unless it is in cash.
 `(2) The trustee is a bank (as defined in section 408(n)) or such other
 person who demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that the manner
 in which such other person will administer the trust will be consistent
 with the requirements of this section.
 `(3) No part of the trust funds will be invested in life insurance contracts.
 `(4) The interest of an investor in the balance of his account is
 nonforfeitable.
 `(5) The assets of the trust will not be commingled with other property
 except in a common trust fund or common investment fund.
 `(c) TAX TREATMENT OF DISTRIBUTIONS-
 `(1) EARNINGS TAXED AS ORDINARY INCOME-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, earnings
 distributed out of a tax deferred account shall be included in the gross
 income of the distributee for the taxable year in which the distribution
 is received.
 `(B) ORDERING RULE FOR DISTRIBUTIONS- Distributions from a tax deferred
 account shall be deemed to be made from the earnings of such account to
 the extent thereof.
 `(C) EARNINGS- The earnings of an account shall include realized appreciation
 and other net gains.
 `(2) ROLLOVER CONTRIBUTIONS- Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any
 distribution from a tax deferred account to the investor to the extent
 the amount received is paid into a tax deferred account for the benefit
 of such investor not later than the sixtieth day after the date on which
 he receives such distribution.
 `(d) SPECIAL RULES-
 `(1) TERMINATION OF ACCOUNT IN CERTAIN CASES- A tax deferred account shall
 be treated as terminated on the first day on which the account--
 `(A) buys or leases any property from, or sells or leases any property to, or
 `(B) borrows any money from, or lends any money to,
the investor or any member of his family.
 `(2) EFFECT OF PLEDGING ACCOUNT AS SECURITY- If at any time the investor
 uses the account (or any portion thereof) as security for a loan, such
 amount or portion shall be treated as a distribution under paragraph (c).
 `(3) DIVORCE- The transfer of an investor's interest in a tax deferred
 account to the investor's former spouse under a divorce decree or under a
 written instrument incident to such divorce shall not be considered a taxable
 transfer made by the investor notwithstanding any other provision of this
 subtitle, and such interest at the time of the transfer is to be treated as
 a tax deferred account of the spouse and not of the investor. Thereafter
 such account shall be treated for purposes of this subtitle as maintained
 for the benefit of such spouse.
 `(4) BASIS IN ACCOUNT AFTER DEATH- The basis of any tax deferred account
 in the hands of a person acquiring such account by reason of the death of
 the investor shall be the same as the basis in such account immediately
 before the death of the investor.
 `(5) CUSTODIAL ACCOUNTS- Rules similar to the rules provided by section
 408(h) shall apply.
 `(6) REPORTS- The trustee of a tax deferred account shall make such reports
 regarding such account to the Secretary, and to the investor, with respect
 to contributions, distributions, and such other matters as the Secretary
 may require by regulations. The reports required by this paragraph shall
 be filed at such time and in such manner, and furnished to such individuals
 at such time and in such manner, as may be required by those regulations.
 `(e) OTHER DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section--
 `(1) INVESTOR- The term `investor' means the individual for whom the
 account is established.
 `(2) MEMBER OF FAMILY- The family of the investor shall be treated as
 including his spouse, ancestors, lineal descendants, and any spouse of a
 lineal descendant.
 `(3) PAYMENTS TREATED AS DISTRIBUTIONS- Any payment from an account shall
 be treated as a distribution from such account.'
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for such part III is amended
 by striking out the item relating to section 134 and inserting in lieu
 thereof the following:
`Sec. 134. Tax deferred accounts.
`Sec. 135. Cross references to other Acts.'
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 taxable years beginning after date of enactment of this Act.