101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 686
AN ACT
To consolidate and improve Federal laws providing compensation and establishing
liability for oilspills.
S 686 ES
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 686
AN ACT
To consolidate and improve Federal laws providing compensation and establishing
liability for oilspills.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
 SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Oil Pollution
 Liability and Compensation Act of 1989'.
 SEC. 2. Table of Contents-
Sec. 1. Short title.
Sec. 2. Table of contents.
Sec. 3. Findings.
TITLE I--OIL POLLUTION LIABILITY AND COMPENSATION
Sec. 101. Definitions.
Sec. 102. Liability.
Sec. 103. Uses of fund.
Sec. 104. Financial responsibility.
Sec. 105. Litigation, jurisdiction, and venue.
Sec. 106. State laws and programs.
TITLE II--OIL POLLUTION PREVENTION AND RESPONSE
Sec. 201. Federal responsibility.
Sec. 202. National contingency plan.
Sec. 203. Regional oil spill response teams.
Sec. 204. Oil spill contingency plan development and approval.
Sec. 205. Oil spill research and development program.
Sec. 206. Penalties.
Sec. 207. User fees.
TITLE III--OIL TANKER NAVIGATION SAFETY
Subtitle A--Provisions Applicable Nationally
Sec. 301. Definitions.
Sec. 302. Licensed personnel.
Sec. 303. Motor vehicle driving records of vessel personnel.
Sec. 304. Alcohol testing; alcohol rehabilitation information.
Sec. 305. Prohibition on service.
Sec. 306. Vessel traffic services.
Sec. 307. Position-reporting and identification equipment.
Sec. 308. Oil tanker construction and size.
Sec. 309. National Council on Oil Spill Technology Research and Development.
Sec. 310. Impact on other law.
Sec. 311. Authority of Secretary in United States waters.
Sec. 312. Penalties.
Sec. 313. Report on user fees.
Subtitle B--Provisions Applicable With Respect to States or Regions
Sec. 351. Pilotage at port of Valdez.
Sec. 352. Bligh reef light.
Sec. 353. Prince William Sound VTS.
Sec. 354. Oil Spill Recovery Institute.
Sec. 355. Radio communications on Mississippi River.
Sec. 356. Funding of Alaska projects and Oil Spill Recovery Institute.
TITLE IV--CONFORMING AMENDMENTS
Sec. 401. Trans-Alaska pipeline fund.
Sec. 402. Intervention on the High Seas Act.
Sec. 403. Clean Water Act.
Sec. 404. Deep Water Port Act.
Sec. 405. Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act.
TITLE V--OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING
Sec. 501. Short title.
Sec. 502. Findings.
Sec. 503. Demonstration projects of oil terminal environmental oversight
and monitoring programs.
Sec. 504. Oil terminal facilities operations associations.
Sec. 505. Oil terminal environmental advisory council.
Sec. 506. Scientific committee for environmental monitoring.
Sec. 507. Technical committee for oil spill planning and preparedness.
Sec. 508. Agency cooperation.
Sec. 509. Recommendations of the council.
Sec. 510. Administrative actions.
Sec. 511. Location; expenses.
Sec. 512. Funding.
Sec. 513. Donations.
Sec. 514. Reports.
Sec. 515. Definitions.
Sec. 516. Savings clause.
TITLE VI--GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 601. Civil penalties.
Sec. 602. Cooperative development of common hydrocarbon-bearing areas.
Sec. 603. Report on agreements between the United States and Canada governing
liability for potential oil spills in the Great Lakes and the Saint Lawrence
Seaway and international contingency plans.
Sec. 604. Agreement between the United States and Canada governing liability
for potential oil spills in the Arctic.
 SEC. 3. FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) oil spills in coastal and inland waters that are not contained and
 removed promptly and completely can cause serious environmental damage,
 including contamination of water, fouling of shorelines, and injury to fish,
 shellfish, and wildlife;
 (2) oil spills in coastal and inland waters that are not contained and
 removed promptly and completely can cause significant economic impacts
 including damage to commercial and recreational fisheries, loss of
 recreational opportunities, and declines in tourism and related activities;
 (3) oil spills occur on a regular basis in United States coastal and inland
 waters, with over ten thousand oil spills reported each year between 1973
 and 1985;
 (4) in March of this year, the largest oil spill in United States history
 occurred when the tanker Exxon Valdez ran aground in Prince William Sound,
 Alaska, spilling eleven million gallons of crude oil to the surrounding
 waters;
 (5) the Exxon Valdez spill caused widespread and significant adverse
 impacts to the marine environment, to fish, birds, marine mammals, and
 other wildlife, to the commercial fishery of Southcentral Alaska and to
 Native villages and subsistence users, and the cleanup of the spill will
 cost millions of dollars;
 (6) in the several months since the wreck of the Exxon Valdez, three
 additional major oil spills occurred within a twenty-four hour period
 in waters off Rhode Island, in the Delaware River, and in the Houston
 Ship Channel;
 (7) there is a need to establish an adequate system of liability and
 compensation to assure prompt and complete cleanup of spilled oil and to
 compensate those damaged by such pollution;
 (8) it is essential that State oil pollution liability and compensation
 statutes not be preempted in any manner by Federal law or international
 protocols;
 (9) there is a need to provide clear direction to the President to ensure
 prompt and proper response to oil spills unless the President specifically
 determines that a private party is providing such a response;
 (10) there is a need to establish minimum Federal standards and requirements
 for Federal approval in contingency planning to assure the prompt and
 effective response to oil spills from facilities and vessels;
 (11) there is a need to establish an adequate and effective system of
 response centers storing necessary vessels, equipment, and supplies and
 housing necessary personnel to assure the prompt and effective response
 to oil spills from facilities and vessels;
 (12) there is a need to provide for full and sustained involvement of
 local citizens and interested groups including fishing, business, and
 environmental interests, in the development of oil spill contingency plans
 and the oversight of operations at major oil facilities and terminals;
 (13) there is a need to establish a clear and sufficient structure of
 penalties to effectively deter those who would discharge oil to the waters
 of the United States or to punish those who cause such discharges;
 (14) there is a need to establish an adequate program of research to
 develop technologies and practices to clean up oil spills, to understand the
 environmental impacts of such spills, or to develop the necessary baseline
 information on the marine environment to understand the long-term effects
 of such spills; and
 (15) it is essential that measures to address the problems associated with
 prevention, response, cleanup, and compensation relating to oil spills be
 enacted into law at the earliest possible date.
TITLE I--OIL POLLUTION LIABILITY AND COMPENSATION
DEFINITIONS
 SEC. 101. For the purposes of this Act--
 (1) the terms `vessel', `public vessel', `owner or operator', `remove' or
 `removal', `contiguous zone', `onshore facility', `offshore facility', and
 `barrel' shall have the meaning provided in section 311(a) of the Clean
 Water Act;
 (2) the terms `person', `navigable waters', and `territorial seas' shall
 have the meaning provided in section 502 of the Clean Water Act;
 (3) the term `act of God' means an unanticipated grave natural disaster or
 other natural phenomenon of an exceptional, inevitable, and irresistible
 character the effects of which could not have been prevented or avoided
 by the exercise of due care or foresight;
 (4) the term `claim' means a request, made in writing for a sum certain, for
 compensation for damages or removal costs resulting from a discharge of oil;
 (5) the term `claimant' means any person who presents a claim for
 compensation under this Act;
 (6) the term `damages' means damages for economic loss or the loss of or
 injury to natural resources as specified in section 102(a) of this Act;
 (7) the term `deepwater port facility' means an offshore facility which
 is or was licensed under the Deepwater Port Act of 1974;
 (8) the term `discharge' means any emission other than natural seepage,
 intentional or unintentional, into the environment, and includes, but is
 not limited to, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying,
 or dumping;
 (9) the term `environment' means the navigable waters, the waters of
 the contiguous zone, the ocean waters of which the natural resources are
 under the exclusive management authority of the United States under the
 Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management Act, adjoining shorelines,
 and the ambient air above such waters and shorelines;
 (10) the term `foreign offshore unit' means a structure or group of
 structures which is located, in whole or in part, in the territorial sea
 or on the continental shelf of a foreign country and is or was used for one
 or more of the following purposes: exploring for, drilling for, producing,
 storing, handling, transferring, processing, or transporting oil produced
 from the seabed beneath the foreign country's territorial sea or from the
 foreign country's continental shelf;
 (11) the term `Fund' means the Oil Spill Compensation Fund, hereby
 established under this Act;
 (12) the term `guarantor' means any person, other than the owner or operator,
 who provides evidence of financial responsibility for an owner or operator
 under this Act or section 311(p) of the Clean Water Act;
 (13) the term `lessee' means a person holding a leasehold interest in
 an oil or gas lease on submerged lands of the Outer Continental Shelf,
 granted or maintained under the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act;
 (14) the term `liable' or `liability' under this Act shall be construed
 to be the standard of liability which obtains under section 311 of the
 Clean Water Act;
 (15) the term `mobile offshore drilling unit' means a vessel capable of
 use as an Outer Continental Shelf facility to drill for oil;
 (16) the term `natural resources' includes land, fish, wildlife, biota,
 air, water, ground water, drinking water supplies, and other such resources
 belonging to, managed by, held in trust by, appertaining to, or otherwise
 controlled by the United States (including the resources of the exclusive
 economic zone established by Presidential Proclamation Numbered 5030, dated
 March 10, 1983), any State or local government, or any foreign government;
 (17) the term `oil' means oil of any kind or in any form, including, but
 not limited to, petroleum, fuel oil, sludge, oil refuse, and oil mixed
 with wastes other than dredged spoil;
 (18) the term `Outer Continental Shelf facility' means an offshore facility
 which is located, in whole or in part, on the Outer Continental Shelf and
 is or was used for one or more of the following purposes: exploring for,
 drilling for, producing, storing, handling, transferring, processing,
 or transporting oil produced from the Outer Continental Shelf;
 (19) the term `owner or operator' means--
 (A) with respect to an Outer Continental Shelf facility other than a
 pipeline or mobile offshore drilling unit, the lessee or permittee of the
 area in which the facility is located, or the holder of a right of use and
 easement granted under the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act for the area
 in which the facility is located (where the holder is a different person
 than the lessee or permittee);
 (B) with respect to a mobile offshore drilling unit being used as an
 Outer Continental Shelf facility, from which oil is discharged on or
 above the surface of the water (or which posed a substantial threat of
 such a discharge), the owner or operator of the unit, and such unit shall
 be deemed to be a tanker;
 (C) with respect to a mobile offshore drilling unit being used as an Outer
 Continental Shelf facility--
 (i) from which oil is discharged on or above the surface of the water (or
 which posed a substantial threat of such a discharge), to the extent removal
 costs or damages exceed the limitation specified in section 102(c)(1)(A), or
 (ii) from which oil is discharged below the surface of the water (or which
 posed a substantial threat of such a discharge),
the lessee or permittee of the area in which the unit is located, or the
holder of a right of use and easement granted under the Outer Continental
Shelf Lands Act for the area in which the unit is located (where the holder
is a different person than the lessee or permittee);
 (20) the term `permittee' means a person holding an authorization, license,
 or permit for geological exploration issued under section 11 of the Outer
 Continental Shelf Lands Act;
 (21) the term `removal costs' means the costs of removal taken after a
 discharge of oil has occurred or where there was a substantial threat of
 a discharge of oil, to prevent, minimize, or mitigate oil pollution from
 that incident, including all costs of completing removal as determined
 under section 106(d). Such removal costs are (A) actual costs incurred by
 the United States, a State or an Indian tribe, not inconsistent with the
 National Contingency Plan, and (B) any other costs of response incurred
 by any other person consistent with the National Contingency Plan;
 (22) the term `tanker' means a vessel constructed or adapted for the
 carriage of oil in bulk or in commercial quantities as cargo; and
 (23) the terms `United States' and `State' mean the several States of the
 United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico,
 Guam, American Samoa, the United States Virgin Islands, the Commonwealth
 of the Northern Marianas, and any other territory or possession over which
 the United States has jurisdiction.
LIABILITY
 SEC. 102. (a) Notwithstanding any other provision or rule of law, and
 subject only to the defenses set forth in subsection (b) of this section,
 the owner or operator of a vessel or an onshore or offshore facility from
 which oil is discharged, or which posed the threat of a discharge which
 causes the incurrence of removal costs, shall be liable for--
 (1)(A) all removal costs incurred by the United States Government or a
 State under subsection (c), (d), (e), (f)(4), or (l) of section 311 of the
 Clean Water Act or under the Intervention on the High Seas or section 18
 of the Deepwater Port Act of 1974; and
 (B) any removal costs incurred by any person, including, but not limited
 to, any State; and
 (2) all damages for economic loss or loss of natural resources resulting
 from such a discharge, including--
 (A) any injury to, destruction of, or loss of any real or personal property;
 (B) any loss of use of real or personal property;
 (C) any injury to, destruction, mitigation, or loss of natural resources,
 including the reasonable costs of assessing such injury, destruction,
 or loss;
 (D) any loss of use, including loss of subsistence use, of any natural
 resources, without regard to the ownership or management of such resources;
 (E) any loss of income or profits or impairment of earning capacity resulting
 from injury to or destruction of real or personal property or natural
 resources, without regard to the ownership of such property or resources; and
 (F) any direct or indirect loss of tax, royalty, rental, or net profits
 share revenue by the Federal Government or any State or political subdivision
 thereof, for a period of not to exceed one year.
 (b)(1) There shall be no liability under subsection (a) of this section
 for a person otherwise liable who can establish by a preponderance of the
 evidence that the discharge or threat of discharge of oil and the damages
 resulting therefrom were caused solely by--
 (A) an act of God;
 (B) an act of war;
 (C) an act or omission of a third party other than an employee or agent
 of the defendant, or than one whose act or omission occurs in connection
 with a contractual relationship, existing directly or indirectly, with
 the defendant (except where the sole contractual arrangement arises from a
 published tariff and acceptance for carriage by a common carrier by rail),
 if the defendant establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that
 (i) the defendant exercised due care with respect to the oil concerned,
 taking into consideration the characteristics of such oil, in light of all
 relevant facts and circumstances, and (ii) the defendant took precautions
 against foreseeable acts or omissions of any such third party and the
 consequences that could foreseeably result from such acts or omissions; or
 (D) any combination of the foregoing paragraphs.
 (2) In any case where the owner or operator of a vessel or an onshore or
 offshore facility can establish by a preponderance of the evidence that
 a discharge and the damages resulting therefrom were caused solely by
 an act or omission of a third party in accordance with paragraph (1)(C)
 (or solely by such an act or omission in combination with an act of God
 or an act of war), such third party shall be liable under this section as
 if such third party were the owner or operator of a vessel or onshore or
 offshore facility from which the discharge actually occurred. Where the
 owner or operator of a tanker or an onshore or offshore facility which
 handles or stores oil in bulk or commercial quantities, from which oil is
 discharged, alleges that such discharge was caused solely by an act or
 omission of a third party, such owner or operator shall promptly pay to
 the United States Government, and any other claimant, the costs of removal
 or damages claimed and shall be entitled by subrogation to all rights of
 the United States Government or other claimant to recover such costs of
 removal or damages from such third party under this sub-section.
 (c)(1) The liability of an owner or operator of a vessel or an onshore
 or offshore facility for damages and removal costs under this section for
 each discharge or incident shall not exceed--
 (A) $1,000 per gross ton or $10,000,000, whichever is greater, of any tanker
 carrying oil in bulk or in commercial quantities as cargo, including any
 such barge operating in the navigable waters;
 (B) $600 per gross ton or $500,000, whichever is greater, of any other
 vessel;
 (C) the total of all removal costs under subsection (a)(1) of this section
 plus $75,000,000 for any Outer Continental Shelf facility;
 (D) $350,000,000 for any deepwater port facility (including the liability
 of the licensee for a discharge from any vessel moored at such port, in
 any case where $350,000,000 exceeds $1,000 per gross ton of such vessel); or
 (E) $350,000,000 for any other onshore or offshore facility.
The liability of an owner or operator under this section for interest
(including prejudgment interest) shall not be subject to the limitations of
this paragraph.
 (2) Notwithstanding the limitations of paragraph (1) of this subsection,
 the liability of the owner or operator of a vessel or an onshore or offshore
 facility under subsection (a) of this section shall be the full and total
 damages and removal costs not offset by any removal costs incurred on
 behalf of such owner or operator, if (A) the discharge of oil was the
 result of willful misconduct or gross negligence or of a violation of
 applicable safety, construction, or operating standards or regulations; or
 (B) the owner or operator fails or refuses to report the discharge where
 required by law or to provide all reasonable cooperation and assistance
 requested by a responsible official in connection with removal activities
 or to provide removal action upon order of a responsible official. For the
 purpose of this paragraph, applicable standards or regulations with respect
 to a vessel shall be those adopted or promulgated by a Federal agency.
 (3) Notwithstanding the limitations of paragraph (1) of this subsection or
 the defenses of subsection (b) of this section, all removal costs incurred
 by the United States Government or any State or local official or agency
 in connection with a discharge of oil from any Outer Continental Shelf
 facility or a vessel carrying oil as cargo from such a facility shall be
 borne by the owner or operator of such facility or vessel.
 (4)(A) The President is authorized to establish by regulation, with
 respect to any class or category of onshore or offshore facility subject to
 paragraph (1) (D) or (E) of this subsection, a maximum limit of liability
 under this section of less than $350,000,000, but not less than $8,000,000,
 taking into account the size, storage capacity, oil throughput, proximity
 to sensitive areas, type of oil handled, history of discharges, and other
 factors relevant to risks posed by the class or category of facility.
 (B) The President shall, by regulation, not less often than every three
 years, adjust the limits of liability specified in paragraph (1) of this
 subsection to reflect significant increases in the Consumer Price Index.
 (5) If any person who is liable for a discharge or threat of discharge of oil
 from a vessel or onshore or offshore facility fails without sufficient cause
 to properly provide removal action upon order of the President pursuant
 to section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, such person
 may be liable to the United States for punitive damages in an amount
 at least equal to three times the amount of any costs incurred by the
 Fund as a result of such failure to take proper action. The President is
 authorized to commence a civil action against any such person to recover
 the punitive damages. Any moneys received by the United States pursuant
 to this subsection shall be deposited in the Fund.
 (6)(A) Any person who receives and complies with the terms of any order
 issued under paragraph (1) may, within 60 days after completion of the
 required action, petition the President for reimbursement from the Fund
 established under this section for the reasonable costs of such action,
 plus interest. Any interest payable under this subparagraph shall accrue
 on the amounts expended from the date of expenditure at the same rate as
 specified for interest on investments of the Fund.
 (B) If the President refuses to grant all or part of a petition made under
 this paragraph, the petitioner may within 30 days of receipt of such
 refusal file an action against the President in the appropriate United
 States district court seeking reimbursement from the Fund established
 under this section.
 (C) Except as provided in clause (D), to obtain reimbursement, the petitioner
 shall establish by a preponderance of the evidence that it is not liable
 for removal costs and damages under subsection (f) of this section and
 that costs for which it seeks reimbursement are reasonable in light of
 the action required by the relevant order.
 (D) A petitioner who is liable for removal costs and damages under this
 section may also recover its reasonable costs of response to the extent
 that it can demonstrate, on the administrative record, that the President's
 decision in selecting the removal action ordered was arbitrary and capricious
 or was otherwise not in accordance with law. Reimbursement awarded under
 this subparagraph shall include all reasonable removal costs incurred by
 the petitioner pursuant to the portions of the order found to be arbitrary
 and capricious or otherwise not in accordance with law.
 (E) Reimbursement awarded by a court under clause (C) or (D) may include
 appropriate costs, fees, and other expenses in accordance with subsections
 (a) and (d) of section 2412 of title 28, United States Code.
 (d)(1) In the case of an injury to, destruction of, or loss of natural
 resources under subsection (a)(2)(C) of this section, liability shall be
 (A) to the United States Government for natural resources belonging to,
 managed by, controlled by, or appertaining to the United States, and (B) to
 any State for natural resources within the State or belonging to, managed by,
 controlled by, or appertaining to such State, and (C) where subsection (e)
 of this section applies, to the government of a foreign country for natural
 resources belonging to, managed by, controlled by, or appertaining to such
 government. The President, or the authorized representative of any State or
 of the foreign government, shall act on behalf of the public as trustee of
 such natural resources to recover for such damages. Sums recovered by the
 United States Government as trustee under this subsection shall be retained
 by the trustee, without further appropriation, for use only to restore,
 replace, or acquire the equivalent of such natural resources, except that
 the use of such sums to acquire land or interests therein shall be subject
 to further appropriation and used as specifically provided in appropriation
 Acts. Sums recovered by a State as trustee under this subsection shall
 be available for use only to restore, replace, or acquire the equivalent
 of such natural resources by the State. The measure of damages in any
 action under subsection (a)(2)(C) shall not be limited by the sums which
 can be used to restore or replace such resources. There shall be no double
 recovery under this Act by the same claimant for natural resource damages,
 including the costs of damage assessment or restoration, rehabilitation,
 or acquisition for the same discharge and natural resource.
 (2)(A) The President shall designate the Federal officials who shall
 act on behalf of the public as trustees for natural resources under this
 Act. Such officials shall assess damages for injury to, destruction of,
 or loss of natural resources for purposes of this Act for those resources
 under their trusteeship and may, upon request of and reimbursement from
 a State and at the Federal officials discretion, assess damages for those
 natural resources under the State's trusteeship.
 (B) The Governor of each State shall designate State officials who may act
 on behalf of the public as trustee for natural resources under this Act
 and shall notify the President of such designations. Such State officials
 shall assess damages to natural resources for the purposes of this Act
 for those natural resources under their trusteeship.
 (C) Any determination or assessment of damages to natural resources for
 the purposes of this Act made by a Federal or State trustee in accordance
 with the regulations promulgated under paragraph (3) of this subsection
 shall have the force and effect of a rebuttable presumption on behalf of
 the trustee in any administrative or judicial proceeding under this Act.
 (3)(A) The President, acting through the Administrator of the National
 Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, in consultation with the
 Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, the Director of
 the Fish and Wildlife Service, and the heads of other affected agencies,
 not later than two years after the enactment of this Act, shall promulgate
 regulations for the assessment of damages for injury to, destruction of,
 or loss of natural resources resulting from a discharge of oil for the
 purpose of this Act.
 (B) Such regulations shall specify: standard procedures for simplified
 assessments requiring minimal field observation, including establishing
 measures of damages based on units of discharge or units of affected areas,
 where damages equal the costs of restoration, replacement, or acquisition of
 equivalent resources, the diminutions in value of those resources pending
 restoration; and the need for individual assessments. Such regulations
 shall identify the best available procedures to determine such damages.
 (C) Such regulations shall be reviewed and revised as appropriate every
 two years.
 (e)(1) The recovery of removal costs and damages by (A) persons residing
 in a foreign country, (B) the government of a foreign country, or (C)
 any agency or political subdivision of a foreign country, under this Act,
 shall be exclusively in accordance with this subsection.
 (2) A claimant under this subsection must demonstrate that the claimant has
 not been otherwise compensated for incurred removal costs or damages. Except
 with respect to paragraph (3)(D) of this subsection, a claimant under this
 subsection must demonstrate (A) that recovery is authorized by a treaty or
 executive agreement between the United States and the claimant's country, or
 (B) that the Secretary of State, in consultation with the Attorney General
 and other appropriate officials, has certified that the claimant's country
 provides a comparable remedy for United States claimants.
 (3) Where a discharge, or substantial threat of a discharge of oil in or
 on the territorial sea, internal waters, or adjacent shoreline of a foreign
 country occurs, claims for removal costs and damages may be made under this
 subsection if the removal costs or damages resulted from a discharge of,
 or substantial threat of a discharge, of oil from--
 (A) an Outer Continental Shelf facility or a deepwater port facility,
 (B) a vessel occurring in the navigable waters of the United States,
 (C) a vessel carrying oil as cargo between two ports subject to the
 jurisdiction of the United States; or
 (D) a tanker that received oil at the terminal of the pipeline constructed
 under the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Authorization Act for transportation to a
 port in the United States, the discharge or threat having occurred prior
 to delivery to that port.
 (4) This subsection shall apply only in the case of discharges of oil
 occurring after the enactment of this Act.
 (f)(1) No indemnification, hold harmless, or similar agreement or conveyance
 shall be effective to transfer from the owner or operator of any vessel
 or onshore or offshore facility or from any person who may be liable for
 a discharge or threat of discharge under this section, to any other person
 the liability imposed under this section. Nothing in this subsection shall
 bar any agreement to insure, hold harmless, or indemnify a party to such
 agreement for any liability under this section.
 (2) Nothing in this Act, including the provisions of paragraph (1) of this
 subsection, shall bar a cause of action that an owner or operator subject
 to liability under this section, or a guarantor, has or would have, by
 reason of subrogation or otherwise against any person.
 (g) The owner or operator of a vessel shall be liable in accordance with this
 section and section 311 of the Clean Water Act, under maritime tort law,
 and as provided in section 106 of this Act, notwithstanding any provision
 of the Act of March 3, 1851 (46 U.S.C. 183), or the absence of any physical
 damage to the proprietary interest of the claimant.
 (h) Solely for the purpose of bringing claims that arise from the discharge
 of oil, the United States hereby confirms that all right, title, and
 interest of the United States in and to the lands validly selected but
 not yet conveyed pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act as
 amended (43 U.S.C. 1601, et seq.), or the Alaska National Interest Lands
 Conservation Act (Public Law 96-487), to Alaska Native corporations, are
 deemed to have vested in the respective corporations as of March 23, 1989.
USES OF FUND
 SEC. 103. (a) The President shall use the money in the Fund for the
 following purposes:
 (1) all removal costs or other costs of carrying out the purposes of
 subsections (c), (d), (i), and (l) of section 311 of the Clean Water Act,
 sections 5 and 7 of the Intervention on the High Seas Act, and section 18 of
 the Deepwater Port Act, with respect to discharges, or substantial threats
 of discharges, of oil (as the term `oil' is defined in each respective Act);
 (2) payment of any claim for removal costs or damages--
 (A) in excess of the amount for which the owner or operator of the vessel
 or onshore or offshore facility from which oil is discharged is liable
 under section 102 of this Act;
 (B) where the source of the discharge of oil is not known or cannot be
 identified; or
 (C) in any case where the claim has not been satisfied in accordance with
 subsection (c) of this section;
 (3) payment of any claim for removal costs and damages that have resulted
 from the discharge, or substantial threat of a discharge, of oil from a
 foreign offshore unit;
 (4)(A) payment of costs incurred by any State in responding to a discharge,
 or substantial threat of a discharge, of oil into the navigable waters
 or adjoining shorelines from a vessel, an onshore facility, an offshore
 facility, or a foreign offshore unit, as provided in subsection (d) of
 this section;
 (B) reimbursement to any State for the payment of any claims for removal
 costs or damages payable under this Act which such State has paid with
 funds under the control of such State, including payment pursuant to a
 delegation under subsection (c) of this section;
 (5) the costs of assessing both short-term and long-term injury to,
 destruction of, or loss of any natural resources resulting from a discharge
 of oil;
 (6) the costs of Federal or State efforts to restore, rehabilitate, replace
 or acquire the equivalent of any natural resources injured, destroyed,
 or lost as a result of any discharge of oil, except that Federal efforts
 to acquire land or interests therein shall be subject to such amounts as
 are specifically provided in appropriation Acts;
 (7) the costs, not to exceed $50,000,000, of establishing the regional oil
 spill response teams required under section 311(s) of the Clean Water Act,
 of providing other equipment, personnel, and similar overhead related to
 the purposes of this Act and section 311 of the Clean Water Act, and of
 establishing damage assessment capability for any Federal agency involved
 in regional oil spill response teams, strike forces, emergency task forces,
 or other response teams;
 (8) subject to such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts, the
 costs of operating and maintaining the regional oil spill response teams
 required under section 311(s) of the Clean Water Act; of maintaining the
 damage assessment capability for any Federal agency involved in regional
 oil spill response teams, strike forces, emergency task forces, or other
 response teams; and of establishing and maintaining the oil spill research
 and development program required under section 311(u) of the Clean Water Act;
 (9) the costs of a program to identify, investigate, and take enforcement
 and abatement action against discharges of oil, including the provisions
 of section 311(j)(1) (C) and (D) of the Clean Water Act; and
 (10) all administrative and personnel costs of administering the Fund and
 this Act.
 (b) The maximum amount which may be paid from the Fund with respect to
 any single discharge or incident shall not exceed $1,000,000,000.
 (c)(1) The President is authorized to promulgate regulations designating one
 or more Federal officials who may obligate money in the Fund in accordance
 with subsection (a) of this section or portions thereof. The President is
 also authorized to delegate authority to obligate money in the Fund or to
 settle claims to officials of a State with an adequate program operating
 under a cooperative agreement with the Federal Government.
 (2) The President is authorized to delegate the administration of his duties
 and authorities under this Act to the heads of those Federal departments,
 agencies, and instrumentalities which the President determines appropriate.
 (3)(A) Notwithstanding section 9509(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
 the Secretary of the Treasury shall, at the request of the Secretary,
 advance such sums to the Fund in such amount and at such times as are
 necessary to pay removal costs or damages associated with a discharge or
 substantial threat of discharge: Provided, That amounts advanced shall not
 be greater than $1,000,000,000 per incident: Provided further, That the
 aggregate amount of repayable advances to the Fund which is outstanding
 at any one time shall not exceed $1,000,000,000 per incident.
 (B) Advances made pursuant to this paragraph shall be repaid, and interest
 on such advances shall be paid, to the general fund of the Treasury. Such
 interest shall be calculated at the average of the highest rate for
 commercial and finance company paper of maturities of one hundred and
 eighty days or less obtaining on each of the days included within the
 period for which the interest must be paid to the claimant, as published
 in the Federal Reserve bulletin.
 (4)(A) The President shall promulgate, and may from time to time amend,
 regulations for the presentation, filing, processing, settlement, and
 adjudication of claims for removal costs or damages resulting from the
 discharge, or substantial threat of a discharge, of oil under this Act.
 (B) Whenever the President receives information from any person alleging
 that a person has incurred removal costs or damages resulting from the
 discharge, or substantial threat of a discharge, of oil respecting which
 the owner or operator of a vessel or onshore or offshore facility is or
 may be liable under section 102 of this Act, the President shall notify
 the owner, operator, or guarantor of such vessel or facility of that
 allegation. Such owner or operator or guarantor may, within five days after
 receiving the notification or presentation of any claim by a claimant,
 deny the allegation, or deny liability for removal costs and damages for
 any of the reasons set forth in subsection (b) of section 102 of this Act.
 (C) The owner or operator of any vessel or onshore or offshore facility
 from which oil has been discharged shall provide notice to all potentially
 injured parties.
 (D) No claims may be asserted against the Fund pursuant to subsection
 (a) unless such claim is presented in the first instance to the owner
 or operator or guarantor of the vessel or onshore or offshore facility
 from which oil has been discharged, if known to the claimant, and to any
 other person known to the claimant who may be liable under section 102. In
 any case where the claim has not been satisfied within one hundred eighty
 days of presentation in accordance with this subsection, the claimant may
 present the claim to the Fund for payment. No claim against the Fund may
 be approved or certified during the pendency of an action by the claimant
 in court to recover costs which are the subject of the claim.
 (d) The Governor of each State, or any appropriate State official
 designated by the Governor, is authorized to obligate the Fund for the
 payment of removal costs in an amount not to exceed $250,000 per discharge
 or substantial threat of discharge of oil, for the purpose of immediate
 response, subject only to the requirement that the President be notified
 within twenty-four hours of any such obligation under the authority of
 this sentence. In addition, the President shall enter into an agreement
 with the Governor of any interested State to provide a procedure by which
 the Governor or designated State official may undertake additional removal
 action or obligate the Fund for the additional payment of removal costs
 for response to a particular discharge or substantial threat of discharge,
 subject to such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon. Such agreements
 shall provide for political subdivisions of the State to receive payments
 for reasonable removal costs and may authorize advance payments from such
 account to facilitate such efforts. Payments under subsection (a)(4)(A)
 of this section, other than as authorized by the first sentence of
 this subsection, shall be made in accordance with such agreements. The
 President shall, not later than six months after the enactment of this Act,
 publish proposed regulations further establishing how the authority of this
 subsection to obligate the Fund or enter into agreements is to be exercised,
 and, not later than three months after the close of the comment period on
 such proposed regulations, shall promulgate such regulations.
 (e)(1) Payment of any claim by the Fund under this section shall be subject
 to the United States Government acquiring by subrogation all rights of the
 claimant to recover the removal costs or damages from the responsible party.
 (2) Any person, including the Fund, who pays compensation pursuant to this
 Act to any claimant for costs or damages shall be subrogated to all rights,
 claims, and causes of action for those costs and damages that the claimant
 has under this Act or under any other law.
 (3) Upon request of the President, the Attorney General shall commence an
 action on behalf of the Fund to recover any compensation paid by the Fund
 to any claimant pursuant to this Act, and, without regard to any limitation
 of liability with respect to an owner or operator under section 102(c),
 all costs incurred by the Fund by reason of the claim, including interest
 (including prejudgment interest), administrative and adjudicative costs,
 and attorney's fees. Such an action may be commenced against any owner or
 operator or (subject to section 104(e)) guarantor, or against any other
 person who is liable, pursuant to any law, to the compensated claimant
 or to the Fund, for the cost or damages for which the compensation was
 paid. Such an action shall be commenced against the responsible foreign
 government or other responsible party to recover any removal costs or
 damages paid from the Fund as the result of the discharge, or substantial
 threat of discharge, of oil from a foreign offshore unit.
 (f) The Fund shall not be available to pay any claim for costs or damages
 to the extent the discharge or the damages had been caused by the gross
 negligence or willful misconduct of that particular claimant.
 (g) The Comptroller General shall provide an audit review team to audit
 all payments, obligations, reimbursements, or other uses of the Fund,
 to assure that the Fund is being properly administered and that claims
 are being appropriately and expeditiously considered. The Comptroller
 General shall submit to the Congress an interim report one year after
 the establishment of the Fund. The Comptroller General shall thereafter
 provide such auditing of the Fund as is appropriate. Each Federal agency
 shall cooperate with the Comptroller General in carrying out this subsection.
 (h)(1) No claim may be presented under this section for recovery of
 removal costs after the date six years after the date of completion of
 all removal action.
 (2) No claim may be presented under this section for recovery of damages
 unless the claim is presented within three years after the date of the
 discovery of the loss and its connection with the release in question, or
 in the case of damages under section 102(a)(2)(C), if later, the date on
 which final regulations are promulgated under section 102(d)(3) of this Act.
 (3) The time limitations contained herein shall not begin to run--
 (A) against a minor until the earlier of the date when such minor reaches
 eighteen years of age or the date on which a legal representative is duly
 appointed for the minor, or
 (B) against an incompetent person until the earlier of the date on which such
 incompetent's incompetency ends or the date on which a legal representative
 is duly appointed for such incompetent.
 (i) Where the President has paid out of the Fund for any removal costs or
 any costs specified under subsection (a) (5) or (6), no other claim may
 be paid out of the Fund for the same costs.
 (j) Except in a situation requiring action to avoid an irreversible loss
 of natural resources or to prevent or reduce any continuing danger to
 natural resources or similar need for emergency action, funds may not be
 used under this Act for the restoration, rehabilitation, or replacement
 or acquisition of the equivalent of any natural resources until a plan for
 the use of such funds for such purposes has been developed and adopted by
 affected Federal agencies and the Governor or Governors of any State having
 sustained damage to natural resources within its borders, belonging to,
 managed by or appertaining to such State, after adequate public notice
 and opportunity for hearing and consideration of all public comment.
 (k) In the expenditure of Federal funds for removal of oil, including, but
 not limited to, distribution of supplies, construction and other reasonable
 and appropriate activities, which may be carried out by contract or agreement
 with private persons, preference shall be given, to the extent feasible and
 practicable, to those private persons residing or doing business primarily
 in the area affected by the discharge of oil. This section shall not be
 considered to restrict the use of the Department of Defense resources.
FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
 SEC. 104. (a)(1) The owner or operator of any vessel over three hundred gross
 tons (except a non-self-propelled barge that does not carry oil as cargo or
 fuel), using any port or place in the United States or the navigable waters
 or any outer continental shelf facility or deepwater port facility or the
 water of the exclusive economic zone to transship or lighter oil destined
 for a port or place subject to the jurisdiction of the United States,
 shall establish and maintain, in accordance with regulations promulgated
 by the President, evidence of financial responsibility sufficient to meet
 the maximum amount of liability to which, in the case of a tanker, the
 owner or operator could be subjected under section 102(c)(1)(A) of this
 Act, or to which, in the case of any other vessel, the owner or operator
 could be subjected under section 102(c)(1)(B) of this Act, in a case where
 the owner or operator would be entitled to limit liability under that
 section. If the owner or operator owns or operates more than one vessel,
 evidence of financial responsibility need be established only to meet the
 maximum liability applicable to the largest of such vessels.
 (2) The Secretary of the Treasury shall withhold or revoke the clearance
 required by section 4197 of the Revised Statutes of the United States of
 any vessel subject to this subsection that does not have the certification
 required under this subsection or the regulations issued hereunder.
 (3) The Secretary of the department in which the Coast Guard is operating
 may (A) deny entry to any outer continental shelf facility, and deepwater
 port facility, or any port or place in the United States, or (B) detain at
 such a facility or port or place, any vessel that, upon request, does not
 produce the certification required under this subsection or the regulations
 issued hereunder.
 (4) Any vessel subject to the requirements of this subsection which is
 found in the navigable waters without the necessary evidence of financial
 responsibility shall be subject to seizure by the United States of any
 oil carried as cargo.
 (b) Each owner or operator with respect to an outer continental shelf
 facility, deepwater port facility, or other offshore facility, shall
 establish and maintain evidence of financial responsibility sufficient
 to meet the maximum amount of liability to which the owner or operator
 could be subjected under section 102 of this Act in a case where the
 owner or operator would be entitled to limit liability under that section,
 or, in the case of an Outer Continental Shelf facility, in the amount of
 $100,000,000. Such evidence of financial responsibility shall be established
 according to regulations prescribed by the President.
 (c) Financial responsibility under this section may be established by any
 one, or by any combination, of the following methods, which the President
 determines to be acceptable: evidence of insurance, surety bond, guarantee,
 letter of credit, qualification as a self-insurer, or other evidence of
 financial responsibility. Any bond filed shall be issued by a bonding
 company authorized to do business in the United States. In promulgating
 requirements under this section, the President is authorized to specify
 policy or other contractual terms, conditions, or defenses which are
 necessary, or which are unacceptable, in establishing such evidence of
 financial responsibility in order to effectuate the purposes of this Act.
 (d) Any claim for which liability may be established under section 102 of
 this Act may be asserted directly against any guarantor providing evidence
 of financial responsibility for an owner or operator liable under that
 section for costs and damages to which the claim pertains. In defending
 against such a claim, the guarantor may invoke all rights and defenses
 which would be available to the responsible party under section 102. The
 guarantor may also invoke the defense that the discharge was caused by the
 willful misconduct of the owner or operator, but the guarantor may not
 invoke any other defense that might be available in proceedings brought
 by the owner or operator against the guarantor.
 (e) The total liability of any guarantor in a suit brought under this
 section shall be limited to the aggregate amount of the monetary limits
 of the policy of insurance, guarantee, surety bond, letter of credit, or
 similar instrument obtained from the guarantor by the person subject to
 liability under section 102 for the purpose of satisfying the requirement
 for evidence of financial responsibility. Nothing in this subsection shall
 be construed to limit any other State or Federal statutory, contractual,
 or common law liability of a guarantor, including, but not limited to,
 the liability of such guarantor for bad faith either in negotiation or in
 failing to negotiate the settlement of any claim. Nothing in this subsection
 shall be construed, interpreted, or applied to diminish the liability of
 any person under section 102 of this Act or other applicable law.
 (f)(1) Any person who, after notice and an opportunity for a hearing,
 is found to have failed to comply with the requirements of this section
 or the regulations issued thereunder, or with a denial or detention order
 issued under subsection (a)(3) of this section, shall be liable to the United
 States for a civil penalty, not to exceed $25,000 per day of violation. The
 amount of the civil penalty shall be assessed by the President by written
 notice. In determining the amount of the penalty, the President shall take
 into account the nature, circumstances, extent, and gravity of the violation,
 the degree of culpability, any history of prior violation, ability to pay,
 and such other matters as justice may require. The President may compromise,
 modify, or remit, with or without conditions, any civil penalty which is
 subject to imposition or which has been imposed under this paragraph. If
 any person fails to pay an assessed civil penalty after it has become final,
 the President may refer the matter to the Attorney General for collection.
 (2) In addition to, or in lieu of, assessing a penalty under paragraph
 (1) of this subsection, the President may request the Attorney General to
 secure such relief as necessary to compel compliance with this section,
 including, but not limited to, a judicial order terminating operations. The
 district courts of the United States shall have jurisdiction to grant such
 relief as the public interest and the equities of the case may require.
 (g) Any regulation respecting financial responsibility, which has been issued
 pursuant to any provision of law repealed or superseded by this Act, and
 which is in effect on the date immediately preceding the effective date of
 this Act, shall be deemed and construed to be a regulation issued pursuant
 to this section. Such a regulation shall remain in full force and effect
 unless and until superseded by new regulations issued under this section.
LITIGATION, JURISDICTION AND VENUE
 SEC. 105. (a) Review of any regulation promulgated under this Act may be
 had upon application by any interested person only in the Circuit Court
 of Appeals of the United States for the District of Columbia. Any such
 application shall be made within ninety days from the date of promulgation
 of such regulations. Any matter with respect to which review could have been
 obtained under this subsection shall not be subject to judicial review in
 any civil or criminal proceeding for enforcement or to obtain damages or
 recovery of response costs.
 (b) Except as provided in subsections (a) and (c) of this section, the
 United States district courts shall have exclusive original jurisdiction
 over all controversies arising under this Act, without regard to the
 citizenship of the parties or the amount in controversy. Venue shall lie
 in any district in which the discharge or injury or damages occurred, or
 in which the defendant resides, may be found, has its principal office,
 or has appointed an agent for service of process. For the purposes of this
 section, the Fund shall reside in the District of Columbia.
 (c) A State trial court of competent jurisdiction over similar claims may
 consider claims under section 102 or State law and any final judgment of
 such court (when no longer subject to ordinary forms of review) shall be
 recognized, valid, and enforceable for all purposes of section 102 and
 section 103 of this Act.
 (d) The provisions of subsections (a), (b), and (c) of this section shall
 not apply to any controversy or other matter resulting from the assessment
 or collection of any tax, or to the review of any regulation promulgated
 under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 (e) The President may prescribe the necessary regulations to carry out
 this Act.
 (f) No provision of this Act shall be deemed or held to moot any litigation
 concerning any discharge of oil, or any damages associated therewith,
 commenced prior to enactment of this Act.
 (g)(1) Except as provided in paragraphs (3) and (4), no action may be
 commenced for damages (as defined in section 101(6)) under this Act,
 unless that action is commenced within three years after the date of the
 discovery of the loss and its connection with the release in question,
 or in the case of damages under section 102(a)(2)(C), if later, the date
 on which regulations are promulgated under section 102(d)(3) of this Act.
 (2) An action for recovery of removal costs referred to in section 102(a)(1)
 must be commenced within three years after completion of the removal
 action. In any such action described in this subsection, the court shall
 enter a declaratory judgment on liability for removal costs or damages
 that will be binding on any subsequent action or actions to recover further
 removal costs or damages. Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph,
 an action may be commenced under section 102 for recovery of removal costs
 at any time after such costs have been incurred.
 (3) No action for contribution for any removal costs or damages may be
 commenced more than three years after--
 (A) the date of judgment in any action under this Act for recovery of such
 costs or damages, or
 (B) the date of entry of a judicially approved settlement with respect to
 such costs or damages.
 (4) No action based on rights subrogated pursuant to this Act by reason of
 payment of a claim may be commenced under this Act more than three years
 after the date of payment of such claim.
 (5) The time limitations contained herein shall not begin to run--
 (A) against a minor until the earlier of the date when such minor reaches
 eighteen years of age or the date on which a legal representative is duly
 appointed for such minor, or
 (B) against an incompetent person until the earlier of the date on which such
 incompetent's incompetency ends or the date on which a legal representative
 is duly appointed for such incompetent.
STATE LAWS AND PROGRAMS
 SEC. 106. (a) Nothing in this Act shall be construed or interpreted as
 preempting any State from imposing any additional liability or requirements
 with respect to the discharge of oil or other pollution by oil within
 such State. Nothing in this Act shall affect or modify in any way the
 obligations or liabilities of any person under other Federal or State law,
 including common law, with respect to discharges of oil.
 (b) Nothing in this Act or in section 9507 of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986 shall in any way affect, or be construed to affect, the authority
 of any State--
 (1) to establish, or to continue in effect, a fund any purpose of which
 is to pay for costs or damages arising out of, or directly resulting from,
 oil pollution or the substantial threat of oil pollution; or
 (2) to require any person to contribute to such a fund.
 (c) A State may enforce, on the navigable waters of such State, the
 requirements for evidence of financial responsibility applicable under
 section 104 of this Act.
 (d) The President shall consult with the affected State or States on
 the appropriate removal action to be taken. Removal with respect to any
 discharge or incident shall be considered completed when so determined by
 the President and the Governor or Governors of the affected State or States.
 (e) Nothing in this Act, the Act of March 3, 1851, as amended (46 U.S.C. 183
 et seq.), or section 9507 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, shall in
 any way affect, or be construed to affect, the authority of the United
 States or any State or political subdivision thereof--
 (1) to impose additional liability or additional requirements, or
 (2) to impose, or to determine the amount of, any fine or penalty (whether
 criminal or civil in nature) for any violation of law,
relating to the discharge, or substantial threat of a discharge, of oil.
TITLE II--OIL POLLUTION PREVENTION AND RESPONSE
FEDERAL RESPONSIBILITY
 SEC. 201. (a) Section 311(c)(1) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
 is amended by striking all that follows after `1976)', and inserting the
 following in lieu thereof: `the President shall remove or arrange for the
 removal of such oil or substance at any time, unless the President determines
 such removal will be done properly and promptly by a State or by the owner
 or operator of the vessel, onshore facility, or offshore facility, from
 which the discharge occurs. Such owner or operator must demonstrate to the
 satisfaction of the President that such owner or operator has the financial
 resources and technical capability necessary to effectively remove the oil
 or hazardous substance. The President is authorized to order such owner
 or operator to remove or arrange to remove the oil or hazardous substance
 and to continue such removal actions until the President determines that
 such actions are no longer necessary to minimize or mitigate damage to the
 public health or welfare, including, but not limited to, fish, shellfish,
 wildlife, and public and private property, shorelines, and beaches.'
 (b) Section 311(d) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1321(d)) is amended by striking out that section and inserting in
 lieu thereof the following:
 `(d) SUBSTANTIAL THREAT OF POLLUTION HAZARD- Whenever a marine disaster in
 or upon the waters subject to the jurisdiction of the United States has
 created a substantial threat of a pollution hazard to the public health
 or welfare of the United States, including, but not limited to, fish,
 shellfish, wildlife, and the public and private shorelines and beaches
 of the United States, because of a discharge, or an imminent discharge,
 of oil, or of a hazardous substance, from a vessel or a facility--
 `(1) the President shall, acting through the person designated under
 subsection (c)(2)(L) of this section, coordinate and direct all public
 and private efforts directed at the removal or elimination of such threat,
 including direction of the activities of the strike force established by
 subsection (c)(2)(C) of this section and the regional oil spill response
 teams established by subsection (s) of this section;
 `(2) the coordination and direction of all public and private efforts
 under paragraph (1) shall include such steps as may be necessary to ensure
 compliance with and performance of approved contingency plans and shall
 not affect the determination of the costs of containment and cleanup or
 damages associated with or resulting from the discharge;
 `(3) the President may summarily remove, and, if necessary, destroy such
 vessel by whatever means are available;
 `(4) the President may, if necessary to ensure prompt and proper removal
 or elimination of such threat, or removal or destruction of such vessel,
 take any action to achieve such ends without regard to any provisions
 of law governing competitive bidding, the employment of personnel or the
 expenditure of appropriate funds;
 `(5) each Federal agency, State, owner or operator of a vessel or a facility,
 or other person shall participate in any efforts under this subsection
 as required under the National Contingency Plan and as directed by the
 person designated under subsection (c)(2)(L) of this section, and may be
 reimbursed for the costs incurred from the Fund established under the Oil
 Pollution Liability and Compensation Act of 1989 to the extent authorized
 by that Act and the National Contingency Plan;
 `(6) any costs incurred by the United States under this subsection or under
 the Intervention on the High Seas Act or the convention defined in section
 2(3) thereof shall be a cost incurred by the United States Government for the
 purposes of subsection (f) in the removal of oil or hazardous substance; and
 `(7) the person designated under subsection (c)(2)(L) of this section shall
 consult with the trustees for natural resources designated under the Oil
 Pollution Liability and Compensation Act of 1989 concerning actions taken
 pursuant to this subsection.'.
NATIONAL CONTINGENCY PLAN
 SEC. 202. Section 311(c)(2) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
 (33 U.S.C. 1321(c)(2)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting at the end of the first sentence thereof `and subsection
 (d) of this section' immediately after `pursuant to this subsection'
 and before the period;
 (2) in subparagraph (A) by inserting `and trusteeship of natural resources'
 immediately after `conservation';
 (3) in subparagraph (C)--
 (A) by inserting `for hazardous substances and establishment of regional
 oil spill response teams under subsection (s) of this section' immediately
 after `strike force'; and
 (B) by inserting `, including measures to protect and restore fisheries
 and wildlife' immediately after `removal plan';
 (4) in subparagraph (G)(i) by striking `and other chemicals' and inserting
 in lieu thereof `, other chemicals and other spill mitigating devices
 and substances';
 (5) in subparagraph (G)(ii) by striking `and chemicals' and inserting
 in lieu thereof `, other chemicals and other spill mitigating devices
 and substances';
 (6) in subparagraph (G)(iii);
 (A) by striking `or chemical' and inserting in lieu thereof `, other
 chemical or other spill mitigating device or substance';
 (B) by inserting `spill mitigating device or substance', immediately after
 `chemical,';
 (C) by striking `and other chemicals' and inserting in lieu thereof `,
 other chemicals and other spill mitigating devices and substances'; and
 (D) by striking `and' at the end;
 (7) in subparagraph (H) by striking `from the fund established under
 subsection (k) of this section for the reasonable costs incurred in such
 removal.' and inserting in lieu thereof `in the case of any discharges
 of oil from a vessel or facility, for the reasonable costs incurred in
 such removal from the Fund established under the Oil Spill Liability and
 Compensation Act of 1989;'; and
 (8) by adding at the end the following new subparagraphs:
 `(I) procedures to provide equipment that is adequate to minimize damage
 resulting from a discharge of oil or a hazardous substance and that is
 appropriate for the environmental features of the area for which it is
 provided, and to require that all such equipment be certified at least
 once each year by the President as adequate and operational;
 `(J) provisions to assure that the person designated under subparagraph (L)
 of this paragraph takes steps within a minimum amount of time to ensure
 a prompt and proper response to a spill or discharge, resolve State and
 local concerns, and implement approved procedures promptly;
 `(K) development and maintenance of a periodically updated international
 inventory of equipment and personnel to remove discharges of oil and
 hazardous substances, which shall be available to the public;
 `(L) designation of a person who shall be primarily responsible for carrying
 out the President's authority under this subsection, and who shall direct
 or coordinate all Federal, State and private efforts under subsection (d)
 of this section to prepare for and respond to a substantial threat of
 a pollution hazard to the public health or welfare, including any such
 efforts of a strike force for hazardous substances established under
 subparagraph (C) of this paragraph or of the regional oil spill response
 teams established under subsection (s) of this section;
 `(M) establishment of criteria and procedures to ensure prompt and
 proper identification of, and response to, marine disasters that create a
 substantial threat of a pollution hazard to the public health or welfare
 of the United States, as required under subsection (d) of this section; and
 `(N) establishment of standards and procedures which comply with the
 provisions of the Oil Pollution Liability and Compensation Act of 1989 for
 reimbursement from the Fund established under that Act of removal costs
 incurred under this subsection and subsection (d) of this section by the
 United States or other persons.'; and
 (9) by inserting the following new sentence immediately before the final
 sentence of paragraph (2): `The President shall revise the National
 Contingency Plan within six months after the date of enactment of the Oil
 Pollution Liability and Compensation Act of 1989 in accordance with the
 changes made to this paragraph by that Act.'.
REGIONAL OIL SPILL RESPONSE TEAMS
 SEC. 203. Section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1321) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new
 subsection:
 `(s)(1) REGIONAL OIL SPILL RESPONSE TEAMS- The President shall establish
 within six months after the date of enactment of this subsection, operate,
 and maintain an oil spill response team for each region of the United States,
 including, but not limited to, Alaska, the Pacific Northwest, California, the
 Gulf of Mexico and the south Atlantic coast, New England, the mid-Atlantic
 coast, and for inland waters, for the purpose of ensuring the prompt and
 proper containment and removal of oil from a worst case discharge, which
 is defined as the discharge, in adverse weather conditions, of the entire
 cargo of the largest vessel which is known to transit a particular team's
 given region. Such response teams shall--
 `(A) consist of such trained personnel and operational equipment from
 the various Federal agencies as are needed to ensure that an adequate
 capability exists within each team's geographic area of responsibility
 to respond promptly and properly with private and public personnel and
 equipment to a worst case discharge, and to meet the requirements of
 subsection (d) of this section. Each team shall, through arrangements
 with private contractors, individual owners and operators of facilities
 or affected vessels, industry oil spill response organizations, and
 other such parties within the team's geographic region, ensure that the
 team is familiar with, and able to exercise immediate direction of, the
 personnel and equipment available from these sources. To the extent that
 the private resources necessary to satisfy the requirements of subsection
 (t) of this section are not sufficient to respond promptly and properly to
 a worst case discharge, each team shall maintain the capability to obtain
 immediately such additional trained personnel and operational equipment
 as are needed for prompt and proper containment, recovery, dispersal,
 shoreline protection and cleanup, and the protection of fisheries and
 wildlife in the event of such a discharge;
 `(B) review those contingency plans required under subsection (t) of this
 section that affect each team's particular area of geographic responsibility,
 and recommend to the President any such changes or modifications that may
 be needed to ensure a prompt and proper response prior to approval of such
 contingency plans;
 `(C) supervise and review, in conjunction with the States and without
 prior notice, the practice drills required by subsection (t)(9) of this
 section, and conduct such additional training and drills as are necessary
 to demonstrate their continued effectiveness and readiness;
 `(D) work with State and local officials to enhance the contingency
 planning of such officials and assure pre-planning of joint response
 efforts, including appropriate procedures for mechanical recovery,
 dispersal, shoreline cleanup, and protection and rescue of fisheries and
 wildlife. Response teams also shall work with State and local officials
 to obtain agreements for use of dispersants and other mitgating devices
 as part of regional contingency plans;
 `(E) establish and maintain an inventory of personnel and equipment, in
 coordination with the international inventory developed under the National
 Contingency Plan, to support spill response activities, consisting at a
 minimum of locations, status, and availability of spill response resources
 and related information;
 `(F) conduct regular inspections of the vessels, equipment, facilities,
 and personnel listed by public and private operators in all contingency
 plans approved by the President for use in their geographic region of
 responsibility;
 `(G) keep on file and readily accessible all approved contingency plans
 for their geographic region of responsibility; and
 `(H) except where provided otherwise by the President, be under the command
 of a person designated by the President under subsection (c)(2)(L) of
 this section.
 `(2) FUNDING- Amounts in the Fund established under the Oil Pollution
 Liability and Compensation Act of 1989 shall be available, without fiscal
 year limitation, to establish and maintain the regional response teams
 required under this paragraph.'.
OIL SPILL CONTINGENCY PLAN DEVELOPMENT AND APPROVAL
 SEC. 204. Section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1321) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new
 subsection:
 `(t)(1) IN GENERAL- This subsection applies to (1) owners and operators
 of all tank vessels (other than public vessels) which carry oil in bulk
 as cargo or cargo residue operating in waters subject to the jurisdiction
 of the United States for purposes of transferring oil in bulk at ports or
 terminals of the United States and (2) operators of oil producing, refining,
 or transportation facilities that due to their location, reasonably could
 be expected to spill oil into or upon navigable waters of the United States,
 adjoining shorelines or the waters of the exclusive economic zone.
 `(2) OIL SPILL CONTINGENCY PLAN DEVELOPMENT- The President shall, within one
 year after enactment of the Oil Pollution Liability and Compensation Act
 of 1989, issue a final rule requiring owners and operators of vessels and
 facilities subject to this paragraph to prepare and submit a contingency
 plan for the prevention, containment and cleanup of oil spills from their
 vessels or facilities and for the protection of fisheries and wildlife
 from such spills. Contingency plans required under this subsection shall--
 `(A) provide full details of the method of response to a worst case oil
 spill, defined as a discharge, in adverse weather conditions, of the entire
 cargo of any vessel which is covered by the plan;
 `(B) if implemented, be capable, in terms of personnel, materials, and
 equipment, of promptly and properly--
 `(i) entirely without the active participation of any Federal personnel
 or equipment, removing oil and minimizing any damage to the environment
 resulting from a maximum probable spill, which shall be defined by the
 President as no less than the largest historic spill from an oil tanker
 of the same class as that to which the contingency plan applies, and
 `(ii) to the maximum extent practicable, as defined by the President,
 without the active participation of any Federal personnel or equipment,
 removing oil and minimizing any damage to the environment resulting from
 a worst case discharge of the vessel to which the contingency plan applies;
 `(C) provide a clear and precise, detailed description of how the
 plan relates to and is integrated into other approved contingency plans
 prepared by cooperatives, ports, regional entities and States, and regional
 oil spill response teams, strike forces and Federal agencies under the
 National Contingency Plan prepared and published pursuant to subsection
 (c)(2) of this section;
 `(D) provide procedures for early detection of oil spills and timely
 notification of such spills to the Federal On Scene Coordinator, regional
 oil spill response teams and strike forces under the National Contingency
 Plan, prepared and published pursuant to subsection (c)(2) of this section,
 and other authorities;
 `(E) state the number, types, operational capacity and availability of
 the oil spill containment equipment to be provided to implement the plan;
 `(F) state the number, training preparedness and fitness of all full-time,
 dedicated, pre-positioned personnel assigned to direct and implement
 the plan;
 `(G) incorporate periodic training and drill programs to assure that
 personnel and equipment to be provided under the plan are in a state of
 operational readiness at all times;
 `(H) state the means of protecting and mitigating effects on the
 environment, including fish, marine mammals and other wildlife, and ensure
 that implementation of the plan does not pose unacceptable risks to the
 public or the environment;
 `(I) provide a detailed description of equipment and procedures to be used
 by the crew of each vessel concerned to minimize damage, stop any spilling
 from the vessel, contain and cleanup the spilled oil promptly and properly,
 and determine if and when additional equipment and personnel are needed;
 `(J) provide arrangements for the pre-positioning of oil spill containment
 and cleanup equipment and trained personnel at strategic locations from
 which they can be deployed to the spill site to promptly and properly
 remove spilled oil;
 `(K) provide arrangements for enlisting the use of additional personnel
 to implement the plan;
 `(L) provide for disposal of recovered spilled oil in accordance with
 Federal, State, and local laws; and
 `(M) describe how implementation of the plan will be coordinated with removal
 efforts by regional oil spill response teams, including the extent to which
 dedicated and trained personnel, fully operational vessels, and equipment
 will be made available to such teams.
 `(3) INSPECTION- Subsequent to issuance of the final rule described in
 paragraph (2) of this subsection, the President shall provide, through the
 regional response teams established in subsection (s) of this section and
 other designated agencies, for regular inspection of vessels, equipment,
 and facilities to ensure compliance with the requirements of the final rule.
 `(4) CONTINGENCY PLAN APPROVAL- In approving the contingency plans required
 by this subsection, the President shall consider--
 `(A) the adequacy of containment and cleanup equipment, personnel,
 communications equipment, response time and logistical arrangements for
 coordination and implementation of response efforts to promptly and properly
 remove oil spills and protect the environment;
 `(B) the nature and amount of vessel traffic within the area covered by
 the plan;
 `(C) the volume and type of oil being transported within the area covered
 by the plan;
 `(D) the existence of navigational hazards within the area covered by
 the plan;
 `(E) any history of prior discharges of oil within the area covered by
 the plan;
 `(F) the value and sensitivity of fisheries and wildlife and other natural
 resources within the area covered by the plan;
 `(G) the comments of potentially affected third parties; and
 `(H) relevant information on previous discharges contained in On Scene
 Coordinator reports prepared by the Coast Guard.
No plan shall be approved unless the President determines that such plan meets
the requirements of this subsection and subsection (s) of this section and that
such plan, if implemented, is capable, in terms of personnel, materials and
equipment, of promptly and properly removing any oil spill and minimizing any
damage to the environment as required by paragraph (2)(B) of this subsection.
 `(5) NOTIFICATION OF CHANGES- An owner or operator of a vessel or facility
 shall immediately notify the President, in writing, of any significant
 change in any factor set forth under paragraph (5) of this subsection,
 in order for the President to require changes, if needed, in the plan
 submitted by such owner or operator.
 `(6) STATE APPROVAL OF PLANS- The President may enter into a cooperative
 agreement with the chief executive officer of any State to delegate to
 that State the authority to approve contingency plans consistent with the
 requirements of this subsection and subsection (t) of this section.
 `(7) PROHIBITION- It shall be unlawful to operate a vessel in or upon the
 navigable waters of the United States and the exclusive economic zone or
 to operate a facility that is not in compliance with a contingency plan
 submitted and approved under this subsection.
 `(8) LEGAL EFFECT OF CONTINGENCY PLANS- The provisions of contingency plans
 submitted to and approved by the President pursuant to this subsection
 shall be deemed to be legally binding upon those persons submitting them
 to the President. The district courts of the United States shall have
 jurisdiction to restrain a violation of, compel specific performance of,
 or otherwise enforce such plans upon application by the President or by
 any State to which the President has delegated authority for approval of
 contingency plans under paragraph (7) of this subsection. The President,
 or any State to which the President has delegated authority for approval
 of contingency plans under paragraph (6) of this subsection, may issue an
 order requiring compliance with any contingency plan.
 `(9) PUBLIC AWARENESS AND PRACTICE DRILLS- The President shall publish
 annually a notice of availability of an up-to-date description of the
 contingency plans for oil spills submitted and approved pursuant to this
 subsection and an inventory of equipment available for responding to
 such spills. The President shall require, without prior notice, practice
 drills under the contingency plans approved pursuant to this subsection
 not less than twice each year. The President shall review and publish a
 report on such drills, including an assessment of actual response time
 and available equipment and personnel compared to those listed in the
 contingency plans, and requirements, if any, for changes in the plans or
 their implementation. The President shall require such additional drills
 and changes in arrangements for implementing approved plans as are necessary
 to ensure their effective implementation.
 `(10) Each contingency plan submitted and approved pursuant to this
 subsection shall be kept on file and readily accessible by the oil spill
 response teams and other officials designated under the National Contingency
 Plan, relevant State and local officials, affected vessels or facilities
 and the owner or operator involved.
 `(11) Any owner or operator of a vessel or an onshore facility or an offshore
 facility and any other person subject to any regulation or any order of the
 President isued under this subsection who fails to refuses to comply with
 the provisions of this subsection, or any regulations issued thereunder,
 shall be liable to a civil penalty of not more than $25,000 for each such
 violation. Each violation shall be a separate offense. The President may
 assess and compromise such penalty. No penalty shall be assessed until the
 owner, operator, or other person charged shall have been given notice and
 an opportunity for a hearing on such charge. In determining the amount
 of the penalty, or the amount agreed upon in compromise, the gravity of
 the violation, and the demonstrated good faith of the owner, operator,
 of other person charged in attempting to achieve rapid compliance after
 notification of a violation, shall be considered by the President.'.
OIL SPILL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
 SEC. 205. Section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
 U.S.C. 1321) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new
 subsection:
 `(u)(1) ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM- The President shall establish a research
 and development program on scientific and operational aspects of spill
 prevention, response, containment and recovery which shall, at a minimum,
 give priority to on-water oil recovery and treatment; prevention of loss
 from and away from vessels, including the use of values for such purposes
 and onshore and offshore facilities; prevention and mitigation of shoreline
 impacts; fisheries and wildlife protection, mitigation and recovery;
 and protection of public health and safety.
 `(2) In undertaking such a program, the President shall coordinate research
 and development efforts with other nations, industry, academia, and private
 research and development groups.
 `(3) FUNDING- Amounts in the Fund established under the Oil Pollution
 Liability and Compensation Act of 1989 shall be available, without fiscal
 year limitation, to establish and maintain the research and development
 program required under this paragraph not to exceed $25,000,000 annually.'.
PENALTIES
 SEC. 206. (a) INSPECTION AND ENTRY- Section 308 of the Federal Water
 Pollution Control Act is amended as follows:
 (1) Subsection (a) is amended by--
 (A) adding a new clause (4) providing:
 `(4) obtaining information regarding the identification, nature and quantity
 of materials on a vessel or at a facility,';
 (B) adding a new clause (5) providing:
 `(5) obtaining information regarding the source or nature or extent of a
 discharge or threatened discharge of oil or other pollutants from a vessel
 or a facility,';
 (C) adding a new clause (6) providing:
 `(6) obtaining information relating to the ability of a person to pay for
 or to perform cleanup or other remedial action,';
 (D) renumbering existing clause (4) as clause (7);
 (E) in clause (A), inserting `, vessel, or facility' after the words
 `point source';
 (F) in clause (B)--
 (i) replacing subclause (i) with the following:
 `(i) shall have a right of entry to, upon, or through any premises, vessel,
 or facility in which an effluent source is located or from which there is
 a discharge or threat of discharge of oil or other pollutants into waters
 of the United States, or in which any records required to be maintained
 under clause (A) of this subsection are located,';
 (ii) in subclause (ii), striking the words `which the owner or operator of
 such source is required to sample under such clause' and insert in lieu
 thereof the words `or discharge or threatened discharges of oil or other
 pollutants,'; and
 (iii) adding a new subclause (iii) providing:
 `(iii) may at reasonable times enter any premises, vessel, or facility
 where oil or other pollutants are stored to determine the need for response
 action, to effectuate response action, or to obtain samples of oil or
 other pollutants.'.
 (b) CRIMINAL PENALTIES- (1) Section 309(c) of the Clean Water Act (33
 U.S.C. 1319(c)) is amended by inserting immediately after `308,' each time
 it appears therein the following: `311,'.
 (2) Section 309(c)(4) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act is amended
 by inserting the words `omits material information or' after the word
 `knowingly'.
 (c) ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTIES- (1) Subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) of
 subsection (g) of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1319(g)(1)(A)) is amended
 by inserting immediately after `the Administrator' the first time it appears
 therein the following: `the Secretary of the Department in which the Coast
 Guard is operating'.
 (2) Subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) of subsection (g) of the Clean Water
 Act (33 U.S.C. 1319(g)(1)(A)) is amended by inserting immediately after
 `308' the following: `311'.
 (3) Paragraph (1) of subsection (g) of the Clean Water Act (33
 U.S.C. 1319(g)(1)(A)) is amended by inserting immediately after `the
 Administrator' the third time it appears therein the following: `, the
 Secretary of the Department in which the Coast Guard is operating, or the'.
 (4) Subparagraph (A) of paragraph (6) of subsection (g) of section 309 of
 the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1319(g)(6)(A)) is amended by inserting a
 comma immediately before the period at the end thereof, and the following:
 `except that any action under a State law shall not affect or limit the
 authority of the Administrator or the Secretary of the Department under
 which the Coast Guard is operating with respect to discharges of oil or
 hazardous substances under this subsection or section 311 of this Act'.
 (d) CIVIL PENALTIES- (1) Subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (6) of
 subsection (b) of section 311 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1321(b)(6)
 (A) and (B) are deleted and the following inserted in lieu thereof--
 `(A) Any owner, operator, or person in charge of any onshore facility,
 offshore facility, or vessel from which oil or a hazardous substance is
 discharged in violation of paragraph (3) (i) or (ii) of this subsection
 shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount up to $25,000 per day
 of violation or up to $1,000 per barrel of oil or hazardous substances
 discharged in violation of paragraph (3) of this subsection, whichever
 is greater.
 `(B) In determining the amount of the civil penalty under this paragraph and
 paragraph (5), the court shall consider the seriousness of the violation
 or violations, the economic benefit to the violator, if any, resulting
 from the violation, any history of prior violations, the nature, extent,
 and degree of success of any efforts to minimize or mitigate the effects
 of such discharge, the economic impact of the penalty on the violator,
 and any other matters as justice may require.
 `(C) Where the United States can show that a discharge in violation of
 paragraph (3)(i) or (ii) of this subsection was the result of willful
 negligence, willful misconduct or a violation of applicable safety,
 construction, or operating regulations, the penalty pursuant to paragraph
 (A) of this subsection shall be no less than $250,000.00.
 (D) The Secretary of the Department in which the Coast Guard is operating
 or the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency may request
 the Attorney General to commence a civil action to recover civil penalties
 against any person in the district court in the district in which such
 person is located, resides, or is doing business, and any such court shall
 have jurisdiction to assess such civil penalty.'.
 (2) Subparagraph (C) of paragraph (6) of subsection (b) of section 311 is
 redesignated as subparagraph `(E)'.
 (3) Subparagraph (D) of paragraph (6) of subsection (b) of section 311 is
 redesignated as subparagraph (F).
 (4) Subparagraph (E) of paragraph (6) of subsection (b) of section 311 of
 the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1321(b)(6)(E)) is repealed.
 (e) ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS- Paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of section 311
 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1321(b)(4)) is amended by inserting
 immediately after `public health or welfare' the following: `or the
 environment'.
 (f) REPORTING- Paragraph (5) of subsection (b) of section 311 of the Clean
 Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1321(b)(5)) is amended by deleting all after the first
 sentence and inserting the following in lieu thereof: `any such person (A)
 in charge of a vessel from which oil or a hazardous substance is discharged,
 in violation of paragraph (3)(i) of this subsection or (B) in charge of a
 vessel from which oil or a hazardous substance is discharged in violation
 of paragraph (3)(ii) of this subsection and who is otherwise subject to the
 jurisdiction of the United States at the time of the discharge, or (C) in
 charge of an onshore facility or an offshore facility, who fails to notify
 immediately such agency of such discharge shall, upon conviction, be fined
 in accordance with the applicable provisions of title 18 or imprisoned for
 not more than three years (or not more than five years in the case of a
 second or subsequent conviction), or both. Notification received pursuant
 to this paragraph or information that could not have been obtained but
 for the exploitation of such notification shall not be used against any
 natural person who gives such notification in any criminal case, except
 a prosecution for perjury or for giving a false statement. In addition,
 any such person who knowingly fails to provide the notice required by this
 subsection shall not be entitled to any of the defenses to liability set
 out the Oil Pollution Liability and Compensation Act of 1989.'.
 (g) USE OF PENALTIES- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, penalties
 paid pursuant to section 309(c) or 309(g) of the Federal Water Pollution
 Control Act as a result of violations of section 311(b) and penalties paid
 pursuant to section 311(b)(6) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
 shall be deposited in Fund established under the Oil Pollution Liability
 and Compensation Act of 1989.
USER FEES
 SEC. 207. (a) The President shall, within six months after the date
 of enactment of this Act, prescribe regulations for the assessment and
 collection of user fees from owners or operators of tankers and facilities
 subject to the provisions of this title. The President shall assess and
 collect such fees for services provided to such owners or operators relating
 to such matters as review and approval of contingency plans, inspection
 and evaluation of required equipment and personnel, and practice drills.
 (b) Such fees shall be established in accordance with the provisions of
 section 9701 of title 31, United States Code. Payments of such fees shall
 be deposited in the general fund of the Treasury as offsetting receipts
 of the agencies performing such services and ascribed to activities of
 such agencies under this title.
 (c) Nothing in this section shall alter or expand the duties and liability
 of the United States under existing law for the performance of functions
 for which fees or payments are collected. The collection of such fees or
 payments shall not constitute an express or implied undertaking by the
 United States to perform any service or activity in a certain manner or
 to provide any service at a particular time or place.
TITLE III--OIL TANKER NAVIGATION SAFETY
Subtitle A--Provisions Applicable Nationally
DEFINITIONS
 SEC. 301. As used in this title, the term--
 (1) `affected oil tanker' means an oil tanker operating in waters subject
 to the jurisdiction of the United States that transfers oil in bulk at
 ports or terminals of the United States;
 (2) `Commandant' means the Commandant of the Coast Guard;
 (3) `oil tanker' means a self-propelled vessel constructed, converted,
 or adapted to carry oil in bulk in its cargo spaces;
 (4) `pilotage waters' means waters subject to the jurisdiction of the
 United States in which affected oil tankers are required to be under the
 direction and control of an individual licensed as a First Class Pilot,
 except as otherwise determined by the Secretary;
 (5) `Prince William Sound' means all navigable waters within the jurisdiction
 of the State of Alaska and the United States north of Hinchinbrook Entrance
 to the Port of Valdez, Alaska; and
 (6) `Secretary' means the Secretary of the department in which the Coast
 Guard is operating.
LICENSED PERSONNEL
 SEC. 302. (a) INITIATION OF RULEMAKING PROCEEDING- Within 60 days after the
 date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall initiate a rulemaking
 proceeding to require for each affected oil tanker transiting pilotage
 waters that, except when pilotage of any such tanker is provided by a
 qualified pilot who is also licensed by a State--
 (1) there be one deck officer and one lookout on the navigation bridge
 in addition to the mate and helmsman on watch, to assist in navigation,
 communications, and lookout responsibilities;
 (2) no less than two individuals on board hold Frist Class Pilot licenses
 with endorsements for the waters being transited, as issued by the Secretary
 under section 7101 of title 46, United States Code; and
 (3) no less than one of the personnel required by paragraph (1) to be
 on the navigation bridge fix and record the position of the tanker on a
 nautical chart of the area at least once every six minutes and, during
 a period determined by the Secretary of no more than 60 days, retain and
 make available the annotated chart for inspection by the Secretary.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE OF FINAL RULE; WAIVER OR MODIFICATION- A final rule
 under the proceeding referred to in subsection (a) shall be in effect
 within 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act. The final
 rule may waive or modify any of the requirements specified in subsection
 (a), to the extent that the Secretary determines such requirement will not
 substantially enhance oil tanker navigation safety, including protection
 of the environment.
 (c) PILOTAGE REVIEW- (1) Within 180 days after the date of enactment of
 this Act, the Secretary shall complete and submit to the Committee on
 Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on
 Merchant Marine and Fisheries of the House of Representatives a review
 of the adequacy of current pilotage regulations in minimizing the risk of
 oil spills, and shall make a determination as to which, if any, additional
 areas of the navigable waters of the United States, including the waters
 of Block Island Sound and Narragansett Bay, shall be considered pilotage
 waters, as defined in this title, the transit of which warrants additional
 pilotage or other requirements. This determination shall, at a minimum,
 include consideration of regions adjacent to vessel traffic lanes that
 present risks of grounding, accident, or collisions, the type of cargo
 transported, the volume and nature of vessel traffic, and the sensitivity
 of the environment.
 (2) In completing the review required by paragraph (1), the Secretary
 shall consider--
 (A) the history of oil tanker incidents in pilotage waters, including those
 which have occurred in the waters of Block Island Sound and Narragansett
 Bay; and
 (B) the relationship, if any, between those incidents and possible
 deficiencies in the current system of pilotage regulation.
 (3) The review shall include such recommendations as the Secretary considers
 appropriate for modifications in the current system of pilotage regulation
 to enhance the safety of oil tanker navigation in pilotage waters.
MOTOR VEHICLE DRIVING RECORDS OF VESSEL PERSONNEL
 SEC. 303. (a) ACCESS TO REGISTER- Section 206(b) of the National Driver
 Register Act of 1982 (23 U.S.C. 401 note) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating paragraph (5) (as so designated by section 4(b)(1)
 of the Rail Safety Improvement Act of 1988) as paragraph (6); and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(7) Any individual who has applied for or received a merchant mariner's
 document under section 7302 of title 46, United States Code, a license or
 certificate of registry under section 7101 of title 46, United States Code,
 or a renewal of such merchant mariner's document, license, or certificate of
 registry to serve on or operate a commercial vessel may request the chief
 driver licensing official of a State to transmit information regarding
 the individual under subsection (a) of this section to the Commandant of
 the Coast Guard. The Commandant may receive such information and shall,
 prior to using such information in any adverse action regarding the
 merchant mariner's document, license, or certificate of registry of the
 individual, make such information available to the individual for review
 and written comment. The Commandant shall not otherwise divulge or use
 such information, except to verify information required to be reported to
 the Commandant by an individual applying for such a merchant mariner's
 document, license, certificate of registry, or renewal and to evaluate
 whether the individual meets the minimum standards required in order
 to receive such a merchant mariner's document, license, certificate, or
 renewal. There shall be no access to information in the Register under
 this paragraph if such information was entered in the Register more than
 5 years before the date of such request, unless such information relates
 to revocations or suspensions which are still in effect on the date of
 the request. Information submitted to the Register by States under the
 Act of July 14, 1960 (74 Stat. 526), or under this title shall be subject
 to access for the purpose of this paragraph during the transition to the
 Register described under section 203(c) of this title.'.
 (b) SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION AUTHORITY- (1) Section 7704 of title 46, United
 States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(d) If it is shown at a hearing under this chapter that a holder has
 been convicted of a serious criminal offense, has been convicted within
 the previous 5 years of an offense described in section 205(a)(3) (A)
 or (B) of the National Driver Register Act of 1982 (23 U.S.C. 401 note),
 has had a license to operate a motor vehicle denied, cancelled, revoked,
 or suspended in any jurisdiction of the United States for cause, where that
 cause would reflect adversely on the holder's fitness to serve, or fails
 in any way to meet the standards for issuance prescribed in sections 7101
 and 7302 of this title, the license, certificate of registry, or merchant
 mariner's document may be revoked or suspended.'.
 (2) Section 7704(a) of title 46, United States Code, is amended by inserting,
 immediately before the period at the end, the following: `and `serious
 criminal offense' means a crime so heinous in nature that the commission of
 such offense would reflect adversely on the offender's character and on the
 offender's fitness to serve consistent with the interest of safety at sea'.
 (c) RULEMAKING PROCEEDING- Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment
 of this Act, the Commandant shall initiate a rulemaking proceeding to
 require that each individual who has applied for or received a merchant
 mariner's document under section 7302 of title 46, United States Code, a
 license or certificate of registry under section 7101 of title 46, United
 States Code, or a renewal of such merchant mariner's document, license,
 or certificate of registry to serve on or operate a commercial vessel shall--
 (1) request the chief driver licensing official of each State in which
 such individual has within five years applied for or held a motor vehicle
 operator's license to provide to the Commandant such information as the
 Commandant may determine appropriate with respect to such individual's
 driving record; and
 (2) make the request authorized in section 206(b)(7) of the National
 Driver Register Act of 1982 (23 U.S.C. 401 note) for the transmittal to the
 Commandant of such information as the Commandant may determine appropriate.
The rulemaking proceeding shall be completed not later than 180 days after
the date of enactment of this Act.
 (d) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- (1) The catchline to section 7704 of title 46,
 United States Code, is amended to read as follows:
`Sec. 7704. Dangerous drugs and other grounds for suspension or revocation'.
 (2) The item relating to section 7704 in the analysis to chapter 77 of
 title 46, United States Code, is amended to read as follows:
`7704. Dangerous drugs and other grounds for suspension or revocation.'.
ALCOHOL TESTING; ALCOHOL REHABILITATION INFORMATION
 SEC. 304. (a) TESTING REQUIREMENT- The Secretary shall issue a final rule to
 require the periodic, random, and reasonable cause, as well as post-accident,
 testing for use of alcohol by those individuals who, pursuant to licenses
 or merchant mariner's documents issued by the Commandant, perform safety
 sensitive functions (as determined by the Secretary) on affected oil
 tankers. The final rule shall--
 (1) be designed to identify those persons who perform such safety sensitive
 functions on such an oil tanker while impaired by or under the influence
 of alcohol;
 (2) include provisions, procedures, and safeguards analogous to those set
 forth in the Final Rule published on November 21, 1988, at pages 47064
 through 47082 of the Federal Register; and
 (3) be published as a final rule within 90 days after enactment of this Act.
 (b) INFORMATION ON INDIVIDUAL'S ALCOHOL REHABILITATION- The Secretary shall
 conduct a rulemaking proceeding to determine whether to require that the
 Coast Guard be informed, on a confidential basis, whenever an individual
 who has applied for or received a license or merchant mariner's document
 to perform such safety sensitive functions on a commercial vessel is
 undergoing treatment in an alcohol rehabilitation program. The proceeding
 shall consider, among other matters--
 (1) which categories of individuals shall be subject to such information
 on their treatment in an alcohol rehabilitation program; and
 (2) which persons, including such individuals, the owners and operators
 of vessels, and organizations representing masters, pilots, and others
 licensed or documented to perform such safety sensitive functions, shall
 provide such information.
PROHIBITION ON SERVICE
 SEC. 305. The Secretary shall temporarily suspend and take possession of
 the merchant mariner's document or license of an individual performing
 safety sensitive functions (as determined by the Secretary) on an affected
 oil tanker, pending completion of an expedited hearing under chapter 77
 of title 46, United States Code, which shall be commenced within 15 days
 after such temporary suspension, if there is probable cause to believe
 that the individual--
 (1) has served in such capacity while imparied by or under the influence
 of alcohol;
 (2) has been denied a motor vehicle license by a State for cause within
 the previous five years;
 (3) has had any cancellation, revocation, or suspension of a motor vehicle
 operator's license by a State for cause within the previous five years; or
 (4) has been convicted within the previous five years of an offense described
 under section 205(a)(3) (A) or (B) of the National Driver Register Act
 of 1982.
VESSEL TRAFFIC SERVICES
 SEC. 306. (a) LIST OF PORTS REQUIRING VTS ASSISTANCE- The Secretary shall,
 within one year after the date of enactment of this Act, submit a report to
 the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate and the
 Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries of the House of Representatives
 setting forth a list of ports of the United States that are in need of
 new, expanded, or improved Vessel Traffic Service (VTS) systems. The ports
 shall be ranked in order of the priority of that need and the Secretary
 shall detemine that priority on the basis of such factors as the Secretary
 considers appropriate, including the nature, volume, and frequency of
 vessel traffic into and out of such ports, and the risks of collisions,
 spills, and damages associated with such traffic that could be reduced or
 eliminated by installation, expansion, or improvement of a VTS system.
 (b) USER FEE SYSTEM- (1) The Secretary may establish and implement a system
 for the collection of payments by users of VTS systems in ports of the
 United States.
 (2) Any final rule issued by the Secretary to establish and implement such
 a system shall include a schedule of fees established in accordance with
 the provisions of section 9701 of title 31, United States Code.
 (3) Any receipts collected by the Secretary from payments by users of VTS
 systems shall be credited and available to the Secretary without fiscal year
 limitation to meet the costs of construction, installation, improvement,
 and operation of the VTS system for which the payments were made.
 (4) Nothing in this subsection shall alter or expand the duties and liability
 of the United States under existing law for the performance of functions or
 services for which fees or payments are collected. The collection of such
 fees or payments shall not constitute an express or implied undertaking by
 the United States to perform any service or activity in a certain manner
 or to provide any service at a particular time or place.
 (c) LIMITATION- Notwithstanding any other law, except as provided in section
 353, the Secretary shall not construct, improve, expand, or operate any
 new VTS system, unless funds for such construction, improvement, expansion,
 or operation of the new VTS system were obligated on or before the date of
 enactment of this Act, until the Secretary has complied with subsection (a).
POSITION-REPORTING AND IDENTIFICATION EQUIPMENT
 SEC. 307. The Secretary shall, within one year after the date of enactment of
 this Act, complete a rulemaking proceeding to determine whether to require
 that electronic means of vessel position-reporting and identification be
 carried on board affected oil tankers. Among other matters, the proceeding
 shall--
 (1) evaluate whether such electronic means shall be required only for
 tankers above a specific size; and
 (2) consider the minimum standards suitable for such equipment.
OIL TANKER CONSTRUCTION AND SIZE
 SEC. 308. (a) REQUIREMENT FOR DOUBLE HULLS OR DOUBLE BOTTOMS- (1) The
 Secretary shall within one year after the date of enactment of this Act
 complete a rulemaking proceeding to require that all affected oil tankers
 which are newly constructed be equipped with double hulls and double
 bottoms, except to the extent the Secretary determines that either or
 both of such requirements will not enhance oil tanker navigation safety,
 including protection of the environment, or that an equal or greater
 benefit to such oil tanker navigation safety will be achieved by other
 structural requirements.
 (2) The Secretary may require other structural or navigational features
 that the Secretary determines will enhance such oil tanker navigation safety.
 (b) REPORT ON TANKER SIZE- The Secretary shall, within one year after the
 date of enactment of this Act, submit to the Committee on Commerce, Science,
 and Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on Merchant Marine and
 Fisheries of the House of Representatives a report describing the size,
 cargo capacity, and flag-nation of affected oil tankers, specifying changes
 in such size and cargo capacity over the past 20 years, evaluating the extent
 to which the risks or difficulties associated with oil tanker navigation,
 vessel traffic control, accidents, oil spills, and the containment and
 cleanup of such spills are influenced by or related to an increase in
 such size and cargo capacity, and containing a specific recommendation as
 to whether limitations on such size or cargo capacity should be imposed
 to minimize such risks and difficulties. The report shall also contain a
 recommendation for such legislation as the Secretary determines necessary.
NATIONAL COUNCIL ON OIL SPILL TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
 SEC. 309. (a) ESTABLISHMENT OF COUNCIL- The Secretary shall establish
 a National Council on Oil Spill Technology Research and Development
 (hereafter in this section referred to as the `Council').
 (b) MEMBERSHIP OF COUNCIL- (1) The Council shall consist of 15 members,
 comprised of--
 (A) one representative each from the Coast Guard, the Environmental
 Protection Agency, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
 the Fish and Wildlife Service, the Minerals Management Service, the Federal
 Emergency Management Agency, the Corps of Engineers, the Department of
 the Navy, and the Department of Energy; and
 (B) six individuals appointed by the Secretary from the private sector,
 including one each from the following: the oil and gas production industry,
 the oil shipping industry, maritime labor, nonprofit organizations with an
 active involvement in marine environmental issues, the scientific research
 community, and the oil and hazardous materials cleanup and response industry.
 (2) The members of the Council shall be knowledgeable in the containment
 and cleanup of oil spills in the marine environment.
 (3) The representative of the Coast Guard shall serve as chairman of
 the Council.
 (4) Appointed members of the Council shall serve until th Council is
 terminated pursuant to subsection (f).
 (c) COUNCIL FUNCTIONS- (1) The Council shall conduct a comprehensive study
 of governmental and nongovernmental research on oil spill containment and
 cleanup. Among other matters, the study shall--
 (A) evaluate whether there should be developed in the United States a
 fleet of large capacity oil skimming vessels;
 (B) determine the feasibility of developing new technologies for dispersing
 or burning spilled oil; and
 (C) assess experience from the 1989 marine oil spill at Valdez, Alaska,
 in terms of modifications of current technology and techniques that may
 be necessary.
 (2) On the basis of the study conducted under paragraph (1), the Council
 shall, not later than twelve months after its establishment, submit to the
 Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate and the
 Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries of the House of Representatives--
 (A) a bibliography of all existing foreign and domestic research on oil
 spill containment and cleanup;
 (B) a report describing the research and development activities of Federal
 agencies, State and local governmental entities, foreign governments and
 corporations, the academic research community, and industry with respect
 to oil spill containment and cleanup; and
 (C) recommendations concerning additional Federal action with respect to
 such research and development activities.
 (d)(1) COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES- A member of the Council who is not an
 officer or employee of the United States or a member of the Armed Forces,
 when attending meetings of the Council or when otherwise engaged in the
 business of the Council, is entitled to receive--
 (A) compensation at a rate fixed by the Secretary, not exceeding the
 daily equivalent of the current rate of basic pay in effect for GS-18 of
 the General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code,
 including travel time; and
 (B) travel or transportation expenses under section 5703 of title 5,
 United States Code.
 (2) A member of the Council who is an officer or employee of the United
 States or a member of the Armed Forces shall not receive additional pay
 based on the member's service to the Council.
 (3) The provisions of this section relating to an officer or employee
 of the United States or a member of the Armed Forces do not apply to a
 member of a reserve component of the Armed Forces unless that member is
 in an active status.
 (e) STAFFING- The Secretary shall provide such staffing and other assistance
 as the Secretary, after consultation with the chairman of the Council,
 considers necessary for the Council to accomplish its duties.
 (f) TERMINATION- The Council shall cease to exist on the date that is 30
 days after the date on which the bibliography, report, and recommendations
 referred to in subsection (c) are due.
IMPACT ON OTHER LAW
 SEC. 310. Nothing in this title shall be construed or interpreted as
 changing, diminishing, or preempting in any way the authority of a State, or
 any political subdivision thereof, to regulate oil tankers in State waters.
AUTHORITY OF SECRETARY IN UNITED STATES WATERS
 SEC. 311. The Secretary may deny the right to enter, exit, or transit
 waters subject to the jurisdiction of the United States to any affected
 oil tanker that is operated in violation of this title or a regulation
 prescribed under this title.
PENALTIES
 SEC. 312. (a) CIVIL PENALTIES- A person violating this title or a regulation
 issued under this title is liable to the United States for a civil penalty
 of not more than $25,000. Each day of a continuing violation is a separate
 violation.
 (b) LIABILITY IN REM- Each vessel that is operated in violation of this
 title or a regulation issued under this title is liable in rem for a civil
 penalty as prescribed in subsection (a) of this section.
 (c) CRIMINAL PENALTIES- A person willfully and knowingly violating this
 title or a regulation issued under this title shall be fined not more than
 $50,000, imprisoned for not more than five years, or both.
 (d) JURISDICTION- The district courts of the United States have jurisdiction
 to restrain a violation of this title or a regulation issued under this
 title.
REPORT ON USER FEES
 SEC. 313. The Secretary shall, within 180 days after the date of enactment of
 this Act, submit to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
 of the Senate and the Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries of the
 House of Representatives a report on the need, if any, to impose fees upon
 owners or operators of affected oil tankers or other persons in amounts
 sufficient to offset the additional costs of implementing this title. The
 Secretary shall include in the report an evaluation of the desirability
 and feasibility of assessing and collecting such fees, the adequacy of
 existing authority for doing so, and recommendations for such additional
 legislation as the Secretary considers necessary.
Subtitle B--Provisions Applicable with respect to States or Regions
PILOTAGE AT PORT OF VALDEZ
 SEC. 351. The Secretary shall initiate a rulemaking proceeding within 60
 days after the date of enactment of this Act to require that all affected
 oil tankers entering and departing the Port of Valdez, Alaska, embark and
 disembark a qualified pilot who also is a pilot licensed by the State
 of Alaska at locations that will ensure that pilotage of all such oil
 tankers in waters adjacent to and north of Bligh Reef is provided by such
 pilots. A rule under such proceeding shall be final and in effect within
 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
BLIGH REEF LIGHT
 SEC. 352. The Secretary shall, within one year after the date of enactment
 of this Act, install and ensure operation of an automated navigation light
 on or adjacent to Bligh Reef in Prince William Sound, Alaska, of sufficient
 power and height to provide effective long-range warning of the location
 of Bligh Reef.
PRINCE WILLIAM SOUND VTS
 SEC. 353. The Secretary shall within 180 days after the date of enactment
 of this Act--
 (1) acquire, install, and operate such additional equipment (which may
 consist of radar, closed circuit television, or shipboard dependent
 surveillance), train and locate such personnel, and issue such final
 regulations as are necessary to increase the range of the existing VTS
 system in the Port of Valdez, Alaska, sufficiently to track the locations
 and movements of affected oil tankers transiting Prince William Sound, and
 sound an audible alarm when such tankers depart from designated navigation
 routes; and
 (2) submit to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the
 Senate and the Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries of the House of
 Representatives a report on the feasibility and desirability of instituting
 positive control by the Coast Guard on movements of affected oil tankers
 in Prince William Sound with the use of the VTS system, radar, radio
 telecommunications, and satellite-linked transmitters aboard such tankers.
OIL SPILL RECOVERY INSTITUTE
 SEC. 354. (a) ESTABLISHMENT OF INSTITUTE- The Secretary of Commerce shall
 provide for the establishment of a Prince William Sound Oil Spill Recovery
 Institute (hereafter in this section referred to as the `Institute') to
 be administered by the Secretary of Commerce through the Prince William
 Sound Science and Technology Institute and located in Cordova, Alaska.
 (b) FUNCTIONS- The Institute shall conduct research and carry out educational
 and demonstration projects designed to--
 (1) identify and develop the best available techniques, equipment, and
 materials for dealing with oil spills in the arctic and sub-arctic marine
 environment; and
 (2) complement Federal and State damage assessment efforts and determine,
 document, assess, and understand the long-term effects of the EXXON VALDEZ
 oil spill on the natural resources of Prince William Sound and its adjacent
 waters, the environment, the economy, and the lifestyle and well-being of
 the people who are dependent upon them.
 (c) ADVISORY BOARD- (1) The policies of the Institute shall be determined
 by an Advisory Board composed of--
 (A) one representative appointed by each of the Commissioners of Fish
 and Game, Environmental Conservation, Natural Resources, and Commerce and
 Economic Development of the State of Alaska;
 (B) one representative appointed by each of the Secretaries of Commerce, the
 Interior, Agriculture, Transportation, and the Navy, and the Administrator
 of the Environmental Protection Agency, all of whom shall be Federal
 employees; and
 (C) three residents from communities in Alaska that were affected by
 the EXXON VALDEZ oil spill who are knowledgeable about fisheries, other
 local industries, the marine environment, wildlife, public health, safety,
 or education appointed by the Secretary to serve terms of two years each
 from a list of nine qualified individuals submitted by the Governor of
 the State of Alaska.
 (2) The representative of the Secretary of Commerce shall serve as Chairman
 of the Advisory Board.
 (3) Such policies shall include the conduct and support, through contracts
 and grants, on a nationally competitive basis, of the research, projects,
 and studies to be supported by the Institute in accordance with the purposes
 of this section.
 (d) SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL COMMITTEE- (1) The Advisory Board shall
 establish a Scientific and Technical Committee, composed of specialists in
 matters relating to oil spill containment and cleanup technology, arctic
 and sub-arctic marine ecology, and the living resources and socio-economics
 of Prince William Sound and its adjacent waters, from the University of
 Alaska and elsewhere in the academic community.
 (2) The Scientific and Technical Committee shall provide such advice to
 the Advisory Board as the Board shall request, including recommendations
 regarding the conduct and support of research, projects, and studies in
 accordance with the purposes of this section.
 (e) DIRECTOR- The Institute shall be administered by a Director who shall
 be appointed by the Secretary of Commerce. The Director may hire such staff
 and incur such expenses on behalf of the Institute as are authorized by
 the Advisory Board.
 (f) EVALUATION- The Secretary of Commerce is authorized to conduct an
 ongoing evaluation of the activities of the Institute to ensure that
 funds received by the Institute are used in a manner consistent with the
 provisions of this section.
 (g) AUDIT- The Comptroller General of the United States, and any of his
 or her duly authorized representatives, shall have access, for purposes
 of audit and examination, to any books, documents, papers, and records
 of the Institute that are pertinent to the funds received and expended by
 the Institute.
 (h) STATUS OF EMPLOYEES- Employees of the Institute shall not, by reason
 of such employment, be considered to be employees of the Federal Government
 for any purpose.
 (i) TERMINATION- The authority for establishment, operation, and funding
 of the Institute shall terminate ten years after the date of enactment of
 this Act.
RADIO COMMUNICATIONS ON MISSISSIPPI RIVER
 SEC. 355. The Secretary shall, not later than one year after the date of
 enactment of this Act, issue such regulations as are necessary to ensure
 that vessels transiting the Mississippi River shall have such capability
 as the Secretary considers necessary to--
 (1) receive marine navigation safety warnings; and
 (2) engage in radio communications on designated frequencies with the
 Coast Guard, other vessels on the Mississippi River, and such stations as
 may be specified by the Secretary.
FUNDING OF ALASKA PROJECTS AND OIL SPILL RECOVERY INSTITUTE
 SEC. 356. Amounts in the Fund established under this Act shall be available,
 without fiscal year limitation, to carry out the requirements of sections 352
 and 353 of this Act. Of amounts in the Fund, $5,000,000 shall be available
 upon the date of enactment of this Act, and $2,000,000 for each of the
 nine fiscal years following the fiscal year in which this Act is enacted,
 to establish and maintain the Prince William Sound Oil Spill Recovery
 Institute required under section 354 of this Act.
TITLE IV--CONFORMING AMENDMENTS
TRANS-ALASKA PIPELINE FUND
 SEC. 401. (a) Section 204(b) of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Authorization
 Act is amended, in the first sentence--
 (1) by inserting after the words `any area' the words `in the State
 of Alaska';
 (2) by inserting after the words `any activities' the words `related to
 the Trans-Alaska Oil Pipeline'; and
 (3) by inserting at the end of the subsection the following new sentence:
 `This subsection shall not apply to removal costs covered by the Oil Spill
 Liability and Compensation Act of 1989.'.
 (b)(1) Subsection (c) of section 204 of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline
 Authorization Act is repealed. This repeal shall have no effect on claims
 against the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Liability Fund that arise from discharges
 subject to section 204(c) of such Act prior to the date of enactment
 of this Act. Such claims shall be enforceable against the Oil Spill
 Compensation Fund in accordance with the terms of such section 204(c),
 as in effect immediately prior to the date of enactment of this Act. The
 Oil Spill Compensation Fund shall assume all rights and liabilities of
 the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Liability Fund. All assets of the Trans-Alaska
 Pipeline Liability Fund shall be transferred to the Fund established under
 this Act upon the date of enactment of this Act.
 (2) The owners of the oil at the time it is loaded on vessels from the
 Trans-Alaska Pipeline System shall receive credit against amounts due under
 section 4611 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 U.S.C. 4611). Credit
 shall be allowed only against that portion of amounts due that is
 attributable to the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund rate established by
 section 4611(c) of that Code. The total of all credits under this paragraph
 shall be equal to the amount transferred from the Trans-Alaska Pipeline
 Liability Fund to the Oil Spill Compensation Fund, less any amounts paid
 in settlement of claims against the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Liability Fund
 by the Oil Spill Compensation Fund that are not recovered by the Oil Spill
 Compensation Fund from other parties. Each owner of oil shall receive a
 pro-rated share of the credit established by this paragraph. Such share
 shall be determined by dividing the amount contributed by that owner to
 the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Liability Fund by the total amount contributed
 by all such owners to that Fund and applying the resulting percentage to
 the total credit available under this paragraph.
 (3) For any claims against the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Liability Fund, the
 term `damages' shall include but not be limited to the loss of taxes, fees,
 royalties, rents, or other revenues incurred by a political subdivision
 of a State due to the injury, destruction, or loss of real property,
 personal property, or natural resources, or diminished economic activity
 due to the discharge. This definition shall be deemed to be effective as
 of January 1, 1989.
 (c) Trustees and former trustees of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Liability
 Fund shall not be subject to any liability incurred by that Fund or by the
 present and past officers and trustees of that Fund, other than liability
 for gross negligence or willful misconduct.
INTERVENTION ON THE HIGH SEAS ACT
 SEC. 402. Section 17 of the Intervention on the High Seas Act is amended
 to read as follows:
 `SEC. 17. The Fund established under the Oil Spill Liability and Compensation
 Act of 1989 shall be available to the Secretary for actions taken under
 sections 5 and 7 of this Act.'.
CLEAN WATER ACT
 SEC. 403. Section 311 of the Clean Water Act is amended as follows:
 (a) Subsection (d) is amended by striking out the last sentence.
 (b)(1) Subsections (f), (g), and (i) of section 311 of the Clean Water Act
 shall not apply with respect to any discharge of oil resulting in removal
 costs for which liability is established under section 102 of this Act,
 except that natural resource damage assessment regulations, promulgated
 under section 311(f) of the Clean Water Act shall apply to any such
 discharges pending the entry into force of such regulations promulgated
 under section 102 of this Act.
 (2) Paragraphs (2) and (3) of subsection (f) are amended by striking out
 `under subsection (c) for the removal of such oil or substance by the United
 States Government' each place it appears and inserting in lieu thereof
 `under subsection (c) for the removal of such oil or substance by the United
 States Government and for payments made pursuant to section 103(a)(4)(A)
 of the Oil Pollution Liability and Compensation Act of 1989'.
 (c) Subsection (i) is amended by striking out `(1)' after `(i)' and striking
 out paragraphs (2) and (3).
 (d) Subsection (k) is repealed. Any amounts remaining in the revolving
 fund established under that subsection shall be deposited in the Fund
 established under this Act. The Oil Spill Compensation Fund shall assume all
 liability incurred by the revolving fund established under section 311(k)
 of the Clean Water Act.
 (e) Subsection (l) is amended by striking out the second sentence.
 (f) Subsection (p) is repealed.
 (g) Section 311 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new subsection:
 `(s) The Oil Spill Compensation Fund, established under the Oil Pollution
 Liability and Compensation Act of 1989, shall be available to carry
 out subsections (c), (d), (i), and (l) as those subsections apply to
 discharges, or substantial threats of discharges, of oil. Any amounts
 received by the United States under this section shall be deposited in
 such Oil Spill Compensation Fund.'.
DEEPWATER PORT ACT
 SEC. 404. The Deepwater Port Act of 1974 is amended as follows:
 (a) In section 4(c)(1) strike `section 18(l) of this Act;' and insert in
 lieu thereof `section 104 of the Oil Spill Liability and Compensation Act
 of 1989,'.
 (b) Subsections (b), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (l), (n), and
 paragraph (1) of subsection (m) of section 18 are deleted.
 (c) Paragraph (3) of subsection (c) of section 18 is amended by striking
 `Deepwater Port Liability Fund established pursuant to subsection (f)
 of this section', and inserting in lieu thereof `fund established under
 the Oil Spill Liability and Compensation Act of 1989'.
 (d) Subsections (c), (k), and (m) of section 18 are redesignated (b),
 (c), and (d) respectively, and paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) of subsection
 (m) are redesignated (1), (2), and (3), respectively.
 (e) Any amounts remaining in the Deepwater Port Liability Fund, established
 under section 18(f) of the Deepwater Port Act of 1974, shall be deposited
 in the Fund established under this Act. The Oil Spill Compensation Fund
 shall assume all liability incurred by the Deepwater Port Liability Fund.
OUTER CONTINENTAL SHELF LANDS ACT AMENDMENTS
 SEC. 405. Title III of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act Amendments
 of 1978 is hereby repealed. Any amounts remaining in the Offshore Oil
 Pollution Compensation Fund established under section 302 of that title
 shall be deposited in the Fund established under this Act. The Oil Spill
 Compensation Fund shall assume all liability incurred by the Offshore Oil
 Pollution Compensation Fund.
TITLE V--OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING
SHORT TITLE
 SEC. 501. This title may be cited as the `Oil Terminal Environmental
 Oversight and Monitoring Act of 1989'.
FINDINGS
 SEC. 502. The Congress finds that--
 (1) the March 24, 1989, grounding and rupture of the fully loaded oil
 tanker, the Exxon Valdez, spilled eleven million gallons of crude oil in
 Prince William Sound, an environmentally sensitive area;
 (2) many people believe that complacency on the part of the industry
 and government personnel responsible for monitoring the operation of the
 Valdez terminal and vessel traffic in Prince William Sound was one of the
 contributing factors to the Exxon Valdez oil spill;
 (3) one way to combat this complacency is to involve local citizens in
 the process of preparing, adopting, and revising oil spill contingency plans;
 (4) a mechanism should be established which fosters the long-term partnership
 of industry, government, and local communities in overseeing compliance
 with environmental concerns in the operation of crude oil terminals;
 (5) such a mechanism presently exists at the Sullom Voe terminal in the
 Shetland Islands and this terminal should serve as a model for others;
 (6) because of the effective partnership that has developed at Sullom Voe,
 Sullom Voe is considered the safest terminal in Europe;
 (7) the present system of regulation and oversight of crude oil terminals
 in the United States has degenerated into a process of continual mistrust
 and confrontation;
 (8) only when local citizens are involved in the process will the trust
 develop that is necessary to change the present system from confrontation
 to consensus;
 (9) a pilot program patterned after Sullom Voe should be established in
 Alaska to further refine the concepts and relationships involved; and
 (10) similar programs should eventually be established in other major crude
 oil terminals in the United States because the recent oil spills in Texas,
 Delaware, and Rhode Island indicate that the safe transportation of crude
 oil is a national problem.
DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS OF OIL TERMINAL ENVIRONMENTAL OVERSIGHT AND MONITORING
PROGRAMS
 SEC. 503. There are established two Oil Terminal Environmental Oversight and
 Monitoring Demonstration Programs (hereinafter referred to as the `Program')
 in Alaska. One Program shall be responsible for environmental oversight and
 monitoring of the Alyeska terminal facilities at Valdez in Prince William
 Sound. The other Program shall be responsible for environmental oversight and
 monitoring of the terminal facilities on the Kenai Peninsula in Cook Inlet.
OIL TERMINAL FACILITIES OPERATIONS ASSOCIATION
 SEC. 504. (a) There is established an Oil Terminal Facilities Operations
 Association (hereinafter referred to as the `Association') for each of the
 Programs established in section 503. Each Association shall be comprised
 of four individuals. Two individuals shall be designated by the industrial
 users, owners, and operators of the terminal facilities and shall represent
 those users, owners, and operators. One individual shall be an employee of
 the State of Alaska, shall be designated by the Governor of the State of
 Alaska, and shall represent the State government. One individual shall be
 an employee of the Federal Government, shall be designated by the President
 of the United States, and shall represent the Federal Government.
 (b) The Association shall be responsible for establishing and reviewing
 all policies relating to the operation and maintenance of the oil terminal
 facilities which affect or may affect the environment in the vicinity of
 the terminal. The Association shall provide a forum between the industrial
 users, owners, and operators of the terminal facilities and the United
 States and State of Alaska governments for the discussion and resolution of
 all permits, plans, and site specific regulations governing the activities
 and actions of the terminal facilities which affect or may affect the
 environment in the vicinity of the terminal facilities.
OIL TERMINAL ENVIRONMENTAL ADVISORY COUNCIL
 SEC. 505. (a) There is established an Oil Terminal Environmental Advisory
 Council (hereinafter referred to as the `Council') for each of the Programs
 established by section 503.
 (b) Each Council shall be composed of 16 members as follows:
 (1) one cochairman appointed by the President;
 (2) one cochairman appointed by the Governor of the State of Alaska;
 (3) two representatives selected by the industrial users, owners, and
 operators of the terminal facilities;
 (4) two representatives selected by the fishing industry which depends
 and relies upon the fisheries resources of the waters in vicinity of the
 terminal facilities;
 (5) one representative from each of the following--
 (A) Environmental Protection Agency;
 (B) Coast Guard; and
 (C) Department of the Interior;
 (6) one representative from each of the following State agencies or
 departments of the State of Alaska--
 (A) Department of Environmental Conservation;
 (B) Department of Fish and Game; and
 (C) Department of Natural Resources or Department of Commerce and Economic
 Development;
 (7) one representative selected by the Alaska Native Corporations and other
 Alaska Native organizations the members of which reside in the vicinity
 of the terminal facilities;
 (8) one representative selected by the environmental organizations the
 members of which reside in the vicinity of the terminal facilities;
 (9) one representative selected by the mayors of the boroughs and
 municipalities in the vicinity of the terminal facilities; and
 (10) one representative selected by the Alaska State Chamber of Commerce.
 (c) In appointing cochairman of the Council, the President and the Governor
 of Alaska shall seek individuals who have had a long-term relationship
 with the State of Alaska, a background in the areas of natural resources
 and environmental sciences, and recognized leadership capabilities.
 (d) No individual selected as a member of the Council shall serve on
 the Association.
 (e) The Council shall advise and make recommendations to the Association
 on all policies, permits, and site specific regulations relating to the
 operation and maintenance of terminal facilities which affect or may affect
 the environment in the vicinity of the terminal facilities. In particular,
 the Council shall--
 (1) monitor, through the Monitoring Committee established pursuant to section
 506, the environmental impacts of the operation of the terminal facilities;
 (2) oversee those aspects of terminal facilities operations and maintenance
 which affect or may affect the environment in the vicinity of the terminal
 facilities;
 (3) review, through the Oil Spill Committee established pursuant to
 section 507, the adequacy of oil spill contingency plans for the terminal
 facilities; and
 (4) recommend to the Association--
 (A) standards for permits and site specific regulations intended to
 minimize the impact of terminal facilities operations on the environment
 in the vicinity of the terminal facilities;
 (B) modifications in terminal facilities operations and maintenance intended
 to minimize the impact of terminal facilities operations on the environment
 in the vicinity of the terminal facilities;
 (C) modifications in terminal facilities operations and maintenance intended
 to minimize the risk of oil spills; and
 (D) modifications to the oil spill contingency plan for the terminal
 facilities intended to enhance the ability to respond to an oil spill.
SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING
 SEC. 506. (a) Each Council shall establish a standing scientific committee
 (hereinafter referred to as the `Monitoring Committee') to devise and
 manage a comprehensive program of monitoring of the environmental impacts of
 terminal facilities operations. The membership of the Monitoring Committee
 shall be made up of recognized scientific experts selected by the Council.
 (b) In fulfilling its responsibilities, the Monitoring Committee shall--
 (1) advise the Council on a monitoring strategy that will permit early
 detection of environmental impacts of terminal facilities operations;
 (2) define the requirements of monitoring programs and making recommendations
 to the Council on the implementation of those programs;
 (3) select and contract with universities and other scientific institutions
 to carry out specific monitoring projects authorized by the Council pursuant
 to an approved monitoring strategy; and
 (4) provide written reports to the Council which interpret and assess the
 results of all monitoring programs.
TECHNICAL COMMITTEE FOR OIL SPILL PLANNING AND PREPAREDNESS
 SEC. 507. (a) The Council shall establish a standing technical committee
 (hereinafter referred to as the `Oil Spill Committee') to review and assess
 the planning and preparation for responding to, containing, and cleaning
 up oil spills. The membership of the Oil Spill Committee shall be made up
 of recognized technical experts selected by the Council.
 (b) In fulfilling its responsibilities, the Oil Spill Committee shall--
 (1) periodically review the oil spill contingency plans for the terminal
 facilities in light of new technological developments and changed
 circumstances;
 (2) participate in periodic drills and testing of the oil spill contingency
 plans for the terminal facilities;
 (3) study wind and water currents and other environmental factors in the
 vicinity of the terminal facilities which may affect the ability to respond
 to, contain, and cleanup an oil spill;
 (4) identify highly sensitive areas in the vicinity of the terminal
 facilities which may require specific protective measures in the event of
 an oil spill;
 (5) monitor developments in oil spill containment, response and cleanup
 technology; and
 (6) provide written reports to the Council outlining its findings and
 recommendations.
AGENCY COOPERATION
 SEC. 508. On and after the expiration of the 180-day period following
 the date of enactment of this title, each Federal department, agency, or
 other instrumentality shall, with respect to all permits, site specific
 regulations, and other matters governing the activities and actions of
 the terminal facilities which affect or may affect the environment in
 the vicinity of the terminal facilities, consult with the appropriate
 Council prior to taking substantive action with respect to such permit,
 site specific regulation, or other matter. Such consultation shall be
 carried out with a view to enabling the appropriate Association and Council
 to review such permit, site specific regulation, or other matter and make
 recommendations with respect thereto.
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COUNCIL
 SEC. 509. In the event that the Association does not adopt or significantly
 modifies before adoption any recommendation of the Council made pursuant to
 the authority granted to the Council in subsection (e) of section 505, the
 Association shall provide, in writing within 5 days of its decision, to the
 cochairmen of the Council notice of its decision and a written statement of
 reasons for its rejection or significant modification of the recommendation.
ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIONS
 SEC. 510. Appointments, designations, and selections of individuals to
 serve as members of the Associations and Councils under this title shall
 be submitted to the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency
 prior to the expiration of the 120-day period following the date of the
 enactment of this title. On or before the expiration of the 180-day period
 following such date of enactment, the Administrator shall call an initial
 meeting of each Association and Council for organizational purposes.
LOCATION; EXPENSES
 SEC. 511. (a) Each Association and Council established by this title shall
 be located in the State of Alaska.
 (b) No member of an Association or Council shall be compensated for his or
 her services as a member of such Association or Council, as such, but shall
 be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence,
 at a rate established by such Association or Council not to exceed the
 rates authorized for employees of agencies under sections 5702 and 5703
 of title 5, United States Code.
FUNDING
 SEC. 512. (a) Not to exceed $3,000,000 the Fund established under the
 Oil Production Liability and Compensation Act of 1989 shall be available,
 without fiscal year limitation, to establish the environmental oversight and
 monitoring programs established by this title, subject to section 103(a)(7)
 of this Act, and not to exceed $3,000,000 annually to carry out such program,
 subject to section 103(a)(8) of this Act.
 (b) Moneys made available pursuant to subsection (a) shall be used by the
 Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency to make grants to the
 Associations and Councils established by this title to enable them to carry
 out their functions under this title. Such grants shall be made in such
 amounts and subject to such conditions as the Administrator shall determine.
DONATIONS
 SEC. 513. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, each Association
 or Council established by this title is authorized to accept donations
 and contributions to be used by it in carrying out its functions under
 this title.
REPORTS
 SEC. 514. (a) Prior to the expiration of the 36-month period following the
 date of the enactment of this title, each Association and Council established
 by this title shall report to the President and the Congress concerning
 its activities pursuant to this title, together with its recommendations.
 (b) Prior to the expiration of the 36-month period following the date
 of the enactment of this title, the General Accounting Office shall
 report to the President and the Congress as to the effectiveness of the
 demonstration programs carried out pursuant to this title, together with
 its recommendations.
DEFINITIONS
 SEC. 515. As used in this title--
 (1) `terminal facilities' means the entire oil terminal complex including
 all buildings, docks, pipes, piping, roads, ponds, tanks, vessels, vehicles,
 and other facilities associated with and necessary for the movement of
 crude oil or petroleum products into and out of the oil terminal complex; and
 (2) `vicinity of the terminal' means that geographical area surrounding
 the terminal facilities the environment of which is directly affected or
 may be directly affected by the operation of the terminal facilities.
SAVINGS CLAUSE
 SEC. 516. The rights and responsibilities of the United States or of the
 State of Alaska to preserve and protect the environment through such means
 as regulation of land, air, and water uses, of safety, and of related
 development and activity shall not be superseded by anything in this title.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
PENALTIES
 SEC. 601. Section 24(b) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43
 U.S.C. 1350(b)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `If any' and inserting in lieu thereof `(1) Except as
 provided in paragraph (2), if any';
 (2) by striking `$10,000' and inserting in lieu thereof `$20,000';
 (3) by adding at the end of paragraph (1) the following new sentence:
 `The Secretary shall, by regulation, not less often than every 3 years,
 adjust the penalty specified in this paragraph to reflect increases in
 the Consumer Price Index.'; and
 (4) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(2) If a failure described in paragraph (1) constitutes a threat of serious,
 irreparable, or immediate harm or damage to life (including fish and other
 aquatic life), property, any mineral deposit, or the marine, coastal, or
 human environment, a civil penalty may be assessed without regard to the
 requirement of the expiration of a period allowed for corrective action.'.
COOPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT OF COMMON HYDROCARBON-BEARING AREAS
 SEC. 602. (a) AMENDMENT TO THE OUTER CONTINENTAL SHELF LANDS ACT- Section 5
 of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act, as amended (42 U.S.C. Sec. 1334),
 is amended by adding a new subsection (j) as follows:
 `(j) Cooperative Development of Common Hydrocarbon-Bearing Areas-
 `(1) Findings-
 `(A) The Congress of the United States finds that the unrestrained
 competitive production of hydrocarbons from a common hydrocarbon-bearing
 geological area underlying the Federal and State boundary may result in
 a number of harmful national effects, including--
 `(I) the drilling of unnecessary wells, the installation of unnecessary
 facilities and other imprudent operating practices that result in economic
 waste, environmental damage and damage to life and property;
 `(II) the physical waste of hydrocarbons and an unnecessary reduction in the
 amounts of hydrocarbons that can be produced from certain hydrocarbon-bearing
 areas; and
 `(III) the loss of correlative rights which can result in the reduced
 value of national hydrocarbon resources and disorders in the leasing of
 Federal and State resources.
 `(2) The Secretary shall prevent, through the cooperative development of
 an area, the harmful effects of unrestrained competitive production of
 hydrocarbons from a common hydrocarbon-bearing area underlying the Federal
 and State boundary.'.
 (b) EXCEPTION FOR WEST DELTA FIELD- Section 5(j) of the Outer Continental
 Shelf Lands Act, as added by this section, shall not be applicable with
 respect to Blocks 17 and 18 of the West Delta Field offshore Louisiana.
 (c) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are hereby authorized to be
 appropriated such sums as may be necessary to provide compensation, including
 interest, to the State of Louisiana and its lessees, for net drainage of
 oil and gas resources as determined in the Third Party Factfinder Louisiana
 Boundary Study dated March 21, 1989. For purposes of this section, such
 lessees shall include those persons with an ownership interest in State
 of Louisiana leases SL10087, SL10088 or SL10187, or ownership interests
 in the production or proceeds therefrom, as established by assignment,
 contract or otherwise. Interest shall be computed for the period March 21,
 1989 until the date of payment.
REPORT ON AGREEMENTS BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA GOVERNING LIABILITY
FOR POTENTIAL OIL SPILLS IN THE GREAT LAKES AND THE ST. LAWRENCE SEAWAY AND
INTERNATIONAL CONTINGENCY PLANS
 SEC. 603. (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) the Great Lakes contain 95 percent of the United States' and 20
 percent of the world's fresh surface water, providing drinking water for
 approximately twenty-five million Americans, supporting 20 percent of all
 United States manufacturing, providing habitat for thousands of wildlife
 species, and providing invaluable recreational opportunities and businesses
 for millions of people;
 (2) last year four United States and twenty-two Canadian tanker vessels
 carried eighty-one million barrels of petroleum and hazardous materials
 through the Great Lakes;
 (3) the Great Lakes are particularly vulnerable to oil spills, because
 they contain fresh water and are a closed system, without a larger sea to
 help disperse contaminants and reduce retention time;
 (4) the potential for a disastrous oil spill on the Great Lakes was
 recently demonstrated in March 1989, when the Canadian tank barge Scurry
 narrowly avoided the release of one million four hundred thousand gallons
 of carbon black feedstock when it ran aground twice on the Detroit River,
 near the drinking water intakes which serve nearly three million people;
 (5) the near miss in March of 1989 was not an isolated incident, and
 hundreds of smaller spills have actually occurred in recent years on the
 Great Lakes; and
 (6) concerns have been raised about inadequate requirements by the United
 States and Canada on the prevention and remediation of oil spills in
 the Great Lakes, including questions about measures on double-hulled
 tankers, double-skinned barges, vessel inspections, pilotage rules,
 spill notifications, spill contingency plans, containment equipment,
 wildlife rehabilitation facilities, clean-up procedures and the allocation
 of liability.
 (b) REPORT- The Secretary of State shall review the international agreements
 and treaties with the Republic of Canada, including relevant provisions in
 the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement of 1978, as amended by the Protocol
 of 1987, and the Canada-United States Marine Pollution substances, in order
 to determine whether amendments or additional international agreements are
 necessary to resolve complex questions of recovery of damages in the event
 of an oil spill in the Great Lakes and to ensure the adequacy of measures
 to prevent and remediate such spills. To the extent possible, the Secretary
 of State shall consult with the United States Coast Guard, the Environmental
 Protection Agency, and States surrounding the Great Lakes during this review.
 (c) REPORT- The Secretary of State shall report to the Congress on the
 results of this review within thirty days of the date of enactment.
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA GOVERNING LIABILITY FOR
POTENTIAL OIL SPILLS IN THE ARCTIC OCEAN AND INTERNATIONAL CONTINGENCY PLANS
 SEC. 604. (a) FINDINGS- The Congress finds that--
 (1) Canada has discovered commercial quantities of oil and gas in the
 Amalagak region of the Northwest Territory;
 (2) Canada is currently exploring alternatives for transporting the oil
 from the Amalagak field to markets in Asia and the Far East;
 (3) one of the options the Canadian government is exploring involves
 transhipment of oil from the Amalagak field across the Beaufort Sea to
 tankers which would transport the oil overseas;
 (4) the tankers would traverse the American Exclusive Economic Zone through
 the Beaufort Sea into the Chukchi Sea and then through the Bering Straits;
 (5) these waters serve as the kitchen table for Alaska's native people
 providing them with sustenance in the form of walrus, seals, fish,
 and whales;
 (6) the Beaufort and Chukchi Seas provide important habitat for the bowhead
 whale, the lifeblood of the Eskimo people of Alaska;
 (7) an oil spill in the Arctic Ocean, if not properly dealt with, could
 have significant impacts on the indigenous people of Alaska's North Slope;
 (8) The Canadian Arctic Waters Pollution Act limits recovery of damages
 incurred as a result of offshore exploration or development to $C40 million
 and does not apply west of 141 degrees latitude;
 (9) the Canadian government has entered into an agreement with all companies
 licensed to drill in the Canadian Beaufort mandating liability to United
 States; claimants for damages suffered west of 141 degrees latitude,
 but that liability is limited to $C20 million.
 (10) there is no international agreement in effect between the United
 States and Canada outlining legal liability in the event of an oil spill; and
 (11) there are no international contingency plans involving our two
 governments governing containment and cleanup of an oil spill in the
 Arctic Ocean.
 (b) NEGOTIATIONS- The Congress calls upon the Secretary of State of the
 United States of America and the Foreign Minister of the Republic of Canada
 to begin negotiations on a treaty dealing with the complex questions of
 recovery of damages, contingency plans, and coordinated actions in the
 event of an oil spill in the Arctic Ocean or a tanker accident during the
 shipment of oil by sea.
 (c) REPORT- The Secretary of State shall report to the Congress on his
 efforts toward this end no later than January 1, 1990.
Passed the Senate August 4 (legislative day, Janu- ary 3), 1989.
Attest:
Secretary.
S 686 ES----2
S 686 ES----3
S 686 ES----4
S 686 ES----5
S 686 ES----6
S 686 ES----7
S 686 ES----8aters serve as the kitchen table for Alaska's native people
providing them with sustenance in the form of walrus, seals, fish, and whales;
 (6) the Beaufort and Chukchi Seas provide important hab