S 379 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 379
To amend titles 18 and 29 of the United States Code, to eliminate, and
establish an alternative to the exclusionary rule in Federal criminal
proceedings.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
February 8 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. HATCH introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on the Judiciary
A BILL
To amend titles 18 and 29 of the United States Code, to eliminate, and
establish an alternative to the exclusionary rule in Federal criminal
proceedings.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That (a) chapter 223 to title 18,
 United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new section:
`Sec. 3505. Elimination of exclusionary rule as it pertains to the fourth
amendment
 `Evidence, otherwise admissible in a Federal criminal proceeding, shall
 not be excluded on the grounds that such evidence was obtained in violation
 of the fourth amendment to the United States Constitution.'.
 (b) The table of sections for chapter 223 to title 18, United States Code,
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item:
`3505. Elimination of exclusionary rule as it pertains to the fourth
amendment.'.
 SEC. 2. (a) Title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding immediately
 after chapter 171 a new chapter 172 as follows:
`CHAPTER 172--ILLEGAL SEARCH AND SEIZURE
`Sec.
`2691. Definitions.
`2692. Tort claims; illegal search and seizure.
`2693. Sanctions against investigative or law enforcement officers; illegal
search and seizure.
`2694. Judgment as a bar.
`2695. Attorney fees and costs.
`2696. Applicability of other tort claims procedures.
`Sec. 2691. Definitions
 `As used in this chapter, and section 1346(g) of this title, the term--
 `(1) `Federal agency' includes the executive departments, military
 departments, independent establishments of the United States, and
 corporations primarily acting as instrumentalities or agencies of the United
 States, but does not include any contractor with the United States; and
 `(2) `investigative or law enforcement officer' means any officer of the
 United States who is empowered by law to execute searches, to seize evidence,
 or to make arrests for any violation of Federal law, or any person acting
 under or at the request of such officer.
`Sec. 2692. Tort claims; illegal search and seizure
 `(a) The United States shall be liable for any damages resulting from a
 search or seizure conducted by an investigative or law enforcement officer,
 acting within the scope of his office or employment, in violation of the
 fourth amendment to the United States Constitution.
 `(b) Any person aggrieved by such a violation may recover actual damages
 and such punitive damages as the court may award under subsection (c).
 `(c) Punitive damages may be awarded by the court, upon consideration of
 all of the circumstances of the case, including--
 `(1) the extent of the investigative or law enforcement officer's deviation
 from permissible conduct;
 `(2) the extent to which the violation was willful, reckless, or grossly
 negligent;
 `(3) the extent to which the aggrieved person's privacy was invaded;
 `(4) the extent of the aggrieved person's personal injury, both physical
 and mental;
 `(5) the extent of any property damage; and
 `(6) the effect such an award would have in preventing future violations
 of the fourth amendment to the United States Constitution.
 `(d) Notwithstanding subsections (b) and (c), the recovery of any person who
 is convicted of any offense for which evidence of such offense was seized
 in violation of the fourth amendment to the United States Constitution is
 limited to actual physical personal injury and to actual property damage
 sustained as a result of the unconstitutional search and seizure.
 `(e) No judgment, award, compromise, or settlement of any action brought
 under this section shall exceed the amount of $25,000, including actual
 and punitive damages. The United States shall not be liable for interest
 prior to judgment.
 `(f) Any action under this section shall be brought within the period of
 limitations provided in section 2401(b) of this title.
`Sec. 2693. Sanctions against investigative or law enforcement officers;
illegal search and seizure
 `An investigative or law enforcement officer who conducts a search
 or seizure in violation of the fourth amendment to the United States
 Constitution shall be subject to appropriate discipline in the discretion
 of the Federal agency employing such officer, if that agency determines,
 after notice and hearing, that the officer conducted such search or seizure
 lacking a good faith belief that such search or seizure was constitutional.
`Sec. 2694. Judgment as a bar
 `The remedy against the United States provided under this chapter shall
 be the exclusive civil remedy for a violation of the fourth amendment to
 the United States Constitution by any investigative or law enforcement
 officer acting within the scope of his office or employment whose act or
 omission gave rise to the claim.
`Sec. 2695. Attorney fees and costs
 `In any action brought under this chapter, the court may award any claimant
 who prevails in such action reasonable attorney fees, and other litigation
 costs reasonably incurred.
`Sec. 2696. Applicability of other tort claims procedures
 `The procedures provided in sections 2672, 2675, 2677, 2678, 2679, and
 2680 of this title apply to any action brought under this chapter. For the
 purposes of such sections, any investigative or law enforcement officer
 who conducts a search and seizure in violation of the fourth amendment
 to the Constitution shall be treated as if he were an `employee of the
 government'.'.
 (b) The table of chapters for title 28, United States Code, and for part VI
 of title 28, United States Code, are each amended by inserting immediately
 after the item relating to chapter 171 the following:
2691'.
 SEC. 3. Section 1346 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding
 immediately after subsection (f) the following new subsection:
 `(g) The district courts, together with the United States District Court
 for the District of the Canal Zone, the United States District for the
 Territory of Guam, the District Court for the Northern Mariana Islands,
 and the District Court of the Virgin Islands, shall have exclusive original
 jurisdiction of any civil action on a claim against the United States,
 for money damages, brought under chapter 172 of this title.'.
 SEC. 4. (a) Section 1402(b) of title 28, United States Code, is amended
 by inserting after `subsection (b)' the following: `or subsection (g)'.
 (b) Section 1504 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by striking
 `section 1346(b)' and inserting in lieu thereof `under subsection (b)
 or subsection (g) of section 1346'.
 SEC. 5. The civil action against the United States provided by the
 amendments to title 28, United States Code, made by this Act shall apply
 only to claims arising on or after the date of enactment of this Act.