B37 6-7-89 [Update]
S 1139 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1139
To provide for equality of State taxation of domestic and foreign corporations.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
June 7 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. ROTH (for himself, Mr. LUGAR, Mr. FOWLER, Mr. GLENN, Mr. SYMMS, and
Mr. SIMON) introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Finance
A BILL
To provide for equality of State taxation of domestic and foreign corporations.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Domestic Corporation Taxation Equality Act
 of 1989'.
SEC. 2. STATE TAXATION OF FOREIGN INCOME.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Chapter 77 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating
 to miscellaneous provisions) is amended by adding at the end thereof the
 following new section:
`SEC. 7523. STATE TAXATION OF FOREIGN INCOME.
 `(a) STATE USE OF WORLDWIDE UNITARY METHOD PROHIBITED- No State shall impose
 tax on any taxpayer on a worldwide unitary basis. Notwithstanding the
 foregoing, this subsection shall not preclude any State from permitting
 a taxpayer to be taxed on a worldwide unitary basis pursuant to an
 unconditional election by such taxpayer.
 `(b) STATE TAXATION OF FOREIGN-SOURCE DIVIDENDS- No State shall require the
 inclusion in the income base upon which State income tax of a corporation
 is calculated of more than an equitable portion of any dividend received
 from another corporation, other than a corporation described in one of
 the subparagraphs of subsection (c)(2) . For purposes of this subsection,
 a State shall not be considered to include in the income base more than
 an equitable portion of dividends described in the preceding sentence if it--
 `(1) excludes from the income base at least 85 percent of such dividends; or
 `(2) excludes from the income base the portion of the dividend that
 effectively bears no Federal income tax after application of the foreign
 tax credit.
This subsection shall not be construed to permit State taxation of any
dividend not subject to State taxation prior to enactment of this section.
 `(c) Definitions-
 `(1) INCOME TAX- For purposes of this section, the term `income tax'
 shall include any State franchise or other tax which is imposed upon or
 measured by the income of the taxpayer.
 `(2) WORLDWIDE UNITARY BASIS- For purposes of this section, the term
 `worldwide unitary basis' means that in computing its State income tax
 liability a corporation includes in the income base on which the tax
 is calculated any share of the income of any corporation other than a
 corporation that is a member of the same controlled group of corporations
 and is:
 `(A) a domestic corporation (excluding a corporation that has made an
 effective election under section 936);
 `(B) a corporation described in section 922;
 `(C) a corporation organized in the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam,
 American Samoa, or the United States Virgin Islands;
 `(D) any foreign corporation if (i) such corporation is subject to State
 income tax in at least one State by virtue of its business activities in
 that State, and (ii) the average of the percentages of such corporation's
 property (based on its aggregate original cost), compensation payments
 made for personal services (determined for its most recent Federal taxable
 year), and sales (determined for its most recent Federal taxable year)
 that are assignable to 1 or more locations in the United States is at
 least 20 percent; or
 `(E) any foreign corporation described in subsection (c)(3).
 `(3) CERTAIN FOREIGN CORPORATIONS- A foreign corporation is described in
 this subparagraph if such corporation--
 `(A) is a member of a controlled group of corporations;
 `(B) either carries on no substantial economic activity or makes at least--
 `(i) 50 percent of its sales,
 `(ii) 50 percent of its payments for expenses other than payments for
 intangible property, or
 `(iii) 80 percent of all of its payments for expenses,
to one or more corporations that are described in subparagraphs (A) through
(D) of paragraph (2) and that are within the controlled group of corporations
referred to in subparagraph (A) of this paragraph; and
 `(C) under standards established in regulations to be prescribed by the
 Secretary, is not subject to substantial foreign tax on its net income.
 `(4) CERTAIN DOMESTIC CORPORATIONS TREATED AS FOREIGN CORPORATIONS-
 For purposes of paragraphs (2) and (3), a domestic corporation shall be
 treated as a foreign corporation if the average of the percentages of such
 corporation's property (based on its aggregate original cost), compensation
 payments for personal services (determined for its most recent Federal
 taxable year), and sales (determined for its most recent Federal taxable
 year) that are assignable to one or more locations in the United States
 is less than 20 percent.
 `(5) CONTROLLED GROUP- For purposes of this section, the term `controlled
 group' has the same meaning given to such term by section 267(f)(1), except
 that the determination shall be made without regard to section 1563(b)2(C).
 `(6) CERTAIN BANK BRANCHES- For purposes of this section, a domestic
 branch of a foreign corporation shall be treated as a separate corporation
 that is incorporated in the United States if such branch is engaged in the
 commercial banking business. For purposes of the preceding sentence, a branch
 is engaged in the commercial banking business if (i) the predominant part of
 its business consists of receiving deposits or making loans and discounts,
 and (ii) it is subject to supervision and examination by State or Federal
 authorities having supervision over banking institutions. The Secretary
 may issue regulations providing that for purposes of this section domestic
 branches of foreign corporations in other specified industries shall be
 treated as separate corporations incorporated in the United States.'.
 (b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT- The table of sections for chapter 77 of such Code
 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item:
`Sec. 7523. State taxation of foreign income.'.
 EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable
 years beginning after December 31, 1989.