101st CONGRESS
2d Session
H. R. 736
AN ACT
To require the clear and uniform disclosure by depository institutions of
interest rates payable and fees assessable with respect to deposit accounts.
HR 736 EH
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 736
AN ACT
To require the clear and uniform disclosure by depository institutions of
interest rates payable and fees assessable with respect to deposit accounts.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Truth in Savings Act'.
SEC. 2. FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
 (a) FINDINGS- The Congress hereby finds that economic stability would be
 enhanced, competition between depository institutions would be improved,
 and the ability of the consumer to make informed decisions regarding deposit
 accounts would be strengthened if there were uniformity in the disclosure
 of terms and conditions on which interest is paid and fees are assessed
 in connection with such accounts.
 (b) PURPOSE- It is the purpose of this Act to require the clear and uniform
 disclosure of--
 (1) the rates of interest which are payable on deposit accounts by depository
 institutions; and
 (2) the fees that are assessable against deposit accounts,
so that consumers can make a meaningful comparison between the competing
claims of depository institutions with regard to deposit accounts.
SEC. 3. DISCLOSURE OF INTEREST RATES AND TERMS OF ACCOUNTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (b), each advertisement,
 announcement, or solicitation initiated by any depository institution
 relating to any demand or interest-bearing account which includes any
 reference to a specific rate of interest payable on amounts deposited in
 such account, or to a specific yield or rate of earnings on amounts so
 deposited, shall state the following information, to the extent applicable,
 in a clear and conspicuous manner:
 (1) The annual percentage yield (which shall be noted in greater prominence
 than any other stated rate).
 (2) The period during which such annual percentage yield is in effect.
 (3) All minimum account balance and time requirements which must be met
 in order to earn the advertised yield (and, in the case of accounts for
 which more than 1 yield is stated, each annual percentage yield and the
 account minimum balance requirement associated with each such yield shall
 be in close proximity and have equal prominence).
 (4) The minimum amount of the initial deposit which is required to open
 the account in order to obtain the yield advertised, if such minimum amount
 is greater than the minimum balance necessary to earn the advertised yield.
 (5) The annual rates of simple interest.
 (6) A statement that regular fees or other conditions could reduce the yield.
 (7) A statement that an interest penalty is required for early withdrawal.
 (8) In the case of a certificate of deposit or other account for which the
 stated date of maturity is less than 1 year, a statement of the effective
 percentage yield on the date of maturity.
 (b) BROADCAST AND ELECTRONIC MEDIA AND OUTDOOR ADVERTISING EXCEPTION-
 The Board may, by regulation, exempt advertisements, announcements,
 or solicitations made by any broadcast or electronic medium or outdoor
 advertising display not on the premises of the depository institution
 from any disclosure requirements described in paragraph (4), (5), or (6)
 of subsection (a) if the Board finds that any such disclosure would be
 unnecessarily burdensome.
 (c) MISLEADING DESCRIPTIONS OF FREE OR NO-COST ACCOUNTS PROHIBITED-
 No advertisement, announcement, or solicitation made by any depository
 institution may refer to or describe an account as a free or no-cost
 account if--
 (1) in order to avoid fees or service charges for any period--
 (A) a minimum balance must be maintained in the account during such
 period; or
 (B) the number of transactions during such period may not exceed a maximum
 number; or
 (2) any regular service or transaction fee is imposed.
 (d) MISLEADING OR INACCURATE ADVERTISEMENTS, ETC., PROHIBITED- No depository
 instution shall make any advertisement, announcement, or solicitation
 relating to a deposit account that is inaccurate or misleading or that
 misrepresents such institution's deposit contracts.
SEC. 4. ACCOUNT SCHEDULE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Each depository institution shall maintain a schedule of
 fees, charges, interest rates, and terms and conditions applicable to each
 class of accounts offered by the depository institution, in accordance with
 the requirements of this section and regulations which the Board shall
 prescribe. The Board shall specify, in regulations, which fees, charges,
 penalties, terms, conditions, and account restrictions must be included in
 a schedule required under this subsection. A depository institution need not
 include in such schedule any information not specified in such regulation.
 (b) INFORMATION ON FEES AND CHARGES- The schedule required under subsection
 (a) with respect to any account shall contain the following information:
 (1) A description of all fees, periodic service charges, and penalties which
 may be charged or assessed against the account (or against the account
 holder in connection with such account), the amount of any such fees,
 charge, or penalty (or the method by which such amount will be calculated),
 and the conditions under which any such amount will be assessed.
 (2) All minimum balance requirements that affect fees, charges, and
 penalties, including a clear description of how each such minimum balance
 is calculated.
 (3) Any minimum amount required with respect to the initial deposit in
 order to open the account.
 (c) INFORMATION ON INTEREST RATES- The schedule required under subsection
 (a) with respect to any account shall include the following information:
 (1) Any annual percentage yield.
 (2) The period during which any such annual percentage yield will be
 in effect.
 (3) Any annual rate of simple interest.
 (4) The frequency with which interest will be compounded and credited.
 (5) A clear description of the method used to determine the balance on
 which interest is paid.
 (6) In the case of a certificate of deposit or other account for which the
 stated date of maturity is less than 1 year, a statement of the effective
 percentage yield on the date of maturity.
 (7) The information described in paragraph (1) through (4) with respect
 to any period after the end of the period referred to in paragraph (2) (or
 the method for computing any information described in any such paragraph),
 if applicable.
 (8) Any minimum balance which must be maintained to earn the rates and
 obtain the yields disclosed pursuant to this subsection and a clear
 description of how any such minimum balance is calculated.
 (9) A clear description of any minimum time requirement which must be met
 in order to obtain the yields disclosed pursuant to this subsection and
 any information described in paragraph (1), (2), (3), or (4) that will
 apply if any time requirement is not met.
 (10) A statement, if applicable, that any interest which has accrued but
 has not been credited to an account at the time of a withdrawal from the
 account will not be paid by the depository institution or credited to the
 account by reason of such withdrawal.
 (11) Any provision or requirement relating to nonpayment of interest,
 including any charge or penalty for early withdrawal, and the conditions
 under which any such charge or penalty may be assessed.
 (d) OTHER INFORMATION- The schedule required under subsection (a) shall
 include such other disclosures as the Board may determine to be necessary
 to allow consumers to understand and compare accounts, including frequency
 of interest rate adjustments, account restrictions, and renewal policies
 for time accounts.
 (e) STYLE AND FORMAT- Schedules required under subsection (a) shall be
 written in clear and plain language and be presented in a format designed
 to allow consumers to readily understand the terms of the accounts offered.
SEC. 5. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN ACCOUNTS.
 The Board shall require, in regulations which the Board shall prescribe,
 such modification in the disclosure requirements under this Act relating
 to annual percentage yield as may be necessary to carry out the purposes
 of this Act in the case of--
 (1) accounts with respect to which determination of annual percentage yield
 is based on an annual rate of interest that is guaranteed for a period of
 less than 1 year;
 (2) variable rate accounts;
 (3) accounts which, pursuant to law, do not guarantee payment of a stated
 rate; and
 (4) multiple rate accounts.
SEC. 6. DISTRIBUTION OF SCHEDULES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- A schedule required under section 4 for an appropriate
 account shall be--
 (1) included in any regularly scheduled mailing to holders of that account
 which occurs not more than 90 days after the effective date of the initial
 regulations prescribed by the Board under this Act, unless the depository
 institution has provided, before such effective date, a disclosure which
 meets the requirements of section 4;
 (2) made available to any person upon request; and
 (3) provided to any potential customer before an account is opened or a
 service is rendered.
 (b) DISTRIBUTION IN CASE OF CERTAIN INITIAL DEPOSITS- If--
 (1) a depositor is not physically present at an office of a depository
 institution at the time an initial deposit is accepted with respect to an
 account established by or for such person; and
 (2) the schedule required under section 4(a) has not been furnished
 previously to such depositor, the depository institution shall mail the
 schedule to the depositor at the address shown on the records of the
 depositor institution for such account not later than 10 days after the
 date of the initial deposit.
 (c) DISTRIBUTION OF NOTICE OF CERTAIN CHANGES- If--
 (1) any change is made in any term or condition which is required to be
 disclosed in the schedule required under section 4(a) with respect to any
 account; and
 (2) the change may reduce the yield or adversely affect any holder of
 the account,
all account holders who may be affected by such change shall be notified and
provided with a description of the change by mail at least 30 days before
the change takes effect.
 (d) DISTRIBUTION IN CASE OF ACCOUNTS ESTABLISHED BY MORE THAN 1 INDIVIDUAL
 OR BY A GROUP- If an account is established by more than 1 individual
 or for a person other than an individual, any distribution described in
 this section with respect to such account meets the requirements of this
 section if the distribution is made to 1 of the individuals who established
 the account or 1 individual representatives of the person or whose behalf
 such account was established.
SEC. 7. PAYMENT OF INTEREST.
 (a) CALCULATED ON FULL AMOUNT OF PRINCIPAL- The amount of interest
 accruing on an interest-bearing account at any depository institution
 shall be calculated by such institution on the full amount of principal
 in the account for the stated calculation period at the rate or rates of
 interest disclosed pursuant to this Act.
 (b) NO PARTICULAR METHOD OF COMPOUNDING INTEREST REQUIRED- Subsection
 (a) shall not be construed as prohibiting or requiring the use of any
 particular method of compounding or crediting of interest.
SEC. 8. REGULATIONS
 (a) IN GENERAL- Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment
 of this Act, the Board, after consultation with each agency referred to
 in section 9(a) and public notice and opportunity for comment, shall
 prescribe regulations to carry out the purpose and provisions of this
 Act. The regulations so prescribed, may contain such classifications,
 differentiations, or other provisions, and may provide for such adjustments
 and exceptions for any class of accounts as, in the judgment of the Board,
 are necessary or proper to carry out the purposes of this Act, to prevent
 circumvention or evasion of the requirements of this Act, or to facilitate
 compliance with the requirements of this Act.
 (b) Model Forms and Clauses-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The Board shall publish model forms and clauses for
 common disclosures to facilitate compliance with this Act. In devising
 such forms, the Board shall consider the use by depository institutions
 of data processing or similar automated machines.
 (2) USE OF FORMS AND CLAUSES DEEMED IN COMPLIANCE- Nothing in this Act
 may be construed to require a depository institution to use any such
 model form or clause prescribed by the Board under this subsection. A
 depository institution shall be deemed to be in compliance with the
 disclosure provisions of this Act if the depository institution--
 (A) uses any appropriate model form or clause as published by the Board; or
 (B) uses any such model from or clause and changes it by--
 (i) deleting any information which is not required by this Act; or
 (ii) rearranging the format,
if in making such deletion or rearranging the format, the depository
institution does not affect the substance, clarity, or meaningful sequence
of the disclosure.
 (3) PUBLIC NOTICE AND OPPORTUNITY FOR COMMENT- Model disclosure forms
 and clauses shall be adopted by the Board after duly given notice in the
 Federal Register and an opportunity for public comment in accordance with
 section 553 of title 5, United States Code.
SEC. 9. ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Compliance with the requirements imposed under this Act
 shall be enforced under--
 (1) section 8 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act--
 (A) by the appropriate Federal banking agency (as defined in section 3(q)
 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act) in the case of insured depository
 institutions (as defined in section 3(c)(2) of such Act;
 (B) by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation in the case of depository
 institutions described in clause (i), (ii), or (iii) of section 19(b)(1)(A)
 of the Federal Reserve Act which are not insured depository institutions
 (as defined in section 3(c)(2) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act); and
 (C) by the Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision in the case
 of depository institutions described in clause (v) or (vi) of section
 19(b)(1)(A) of the Federal Reserve Act which are not insured depository
 institutions (as defined in section 3(c)(2) of the Federal Deposit Insurance
 Act); and
 (2) the Federal Credit Union Act, by the National Credit Union Administration
 Board in the case of depository institutions described in clause (iv)
 of section 19(b)(1)(A) of the Federal Reserve Act.
 (b) Additional Enforcement Powers-
 (1) VIOLATION OF THIS ACT TREATED AS VIOLATION OF OTHER ACTS- For purposes of
 the exercise by any agency referred to in subsection (a) of such agency's
 powers under any Act referred to in such subsection, a violation of a
 requirement imposed under this Act shall be deemed to be a violation of
 a requirement imposed under that Act.
 (2) ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY UNDER OTHER ACTS- In addition to the powers
 of any agency referred to in subsection (a) under any provision of law
 specifically referred to in such subsection, each such agency may exercise,
 for purposes of enforcing compliance with any requirement imposed under
 this Act, any other authority conferred on such agency by law.
 (c) REGULATIONS BY AGENCIES OTHER THAN THE BOARD- The authority of the
 Board to issue regulations under this Act does not impair the authority
 of any other agency referred to in subsection (a) to make rules regarding
 its own procedures in enforcing compliance with the requirements imposed
 under this Act.
SEC. 10. CIVIL LIABILITY.
 (a) CIVIL LIABILITY- Except as otherwise provided in this section, any
 depository institution which fails to comply with any requirement imposed
 under this Act or any regulation prescribed under this Act with respect
 to any person who holds an account at such depository institution at the
 time of such failure, or at any time during the 1-year period beginning
 on the date of such failure, shall be liable to such person in an amount
 equal to the sum of--
 (1) any actual damage sustained by such person as a result of the failure;
 (2)(A) in the case of an individual action, such additional amount as the
 court may allow, except that the liability under this subparagraph shall
 not be less than $100 nor greater than $1,000; or
 (B) in the case of a class action, such amount as the court may allow,
 except that--
 (i) as to each member of the class, no minimum recovery shall be applicable;
 and
 (ii) the total recovery under this subparagraph in any class action or
 series of class actions arising out of the same failure to comply by the
 same depository institution shall not be more than the lesser of $500,000
 or 1 percent of the net worth of the depository institution involved; and
 (3) in the case of any successful action to enforce any liability under
 paragraph (1) or (2), the costs of the action, together with reasonable
 attorneys' fees.
 (b) CLASS ACTION AWARDS- In determining the amount of any award in any
 class action, the court shall consider, among other relevant factors--
 (1) the amout of any actual damages awarded;
 (2) the frequency and persistence of failures of compliance;
 (3) the resources of the depository institution;
 (4) the number of persons adversely affected; and
 (5) the extent to which the failure of compliance was intentional.
 (c) Bona Fide Errors-
 (1) GENERAL RULE- A depository institution may not be held liable in
 any action brought under this section for a violation of this Act if the
 depository institution demonstrates by a preponderance of the evidence
 that the violation was not intentional and resulted from a bona fide error,
 notwithstanding the maintenance of procedures reasonably adapted to avoid
 any such error.
 (2) EXAMPLES- Examples of a bona fide error include clerical, calculation,
 computer malfunction and programming, and printing errors, except that
 an error of legal judgment with respect to a depository institution's
 obligation under this Act is not a bona fide error.
 (d) JURISDICTION- Any action under this section may be brought in any United
 States district court, or in any other court of competent jurisdiction,
 within 1 year after the date of the occurrence of the violation involved.
 (e) RELIANCE ON BOARD RULINGS- No provision of this section imposing
 any liability shall apply to any act done or omitted in good faith
 in conformity with any rule, regulation, or interpretation thereof by
 the Board, notwithstanding the fact that after such act or omission has
 occurred, such rule, regulation, or interpretation is amended, rescinded,
 or determined by judicial or other authority to be invalid for any reason.
 (f) NOTIFICATION OF AND ADJUSTMENT FOR ERRORS- A depository institution
 shall not be liable under this section or section 9 for any failure to comply
 with any requirement imposed under this Act with respect to any account if--
 (1) before--
 (A) the end of the 60-day period beginning on the date on which the
 depository institution discovered the failure to comply;
 (B) any action is instituted against the depository institution by the
 account holder under this section with respect to such failure to comply; and
 (C) any written notice of such failure to comply is received by the
 depository institution from the account holder,
the depository institution notifies the account holder of the failure of
such institution to comply with such requirement; and
 (2) the depository institution makes such adjustments as may be necessary
 with respect to such account to ensure that--
 (A) the account holder will not be liable for any amount in excess of the
 amount actually disclosed with respect to any fee or charge;
 (B) the account holder will not be liable for any fee or charge imposed
 under any condition not actually disclosed; and
 (C) interest on amounts in such account will accrue at the annual percentage
 yield, and under the conditions, actually disclosed (and credit will be
 provided for interest already accrued at a different annual percentage
 yield and under different conditions than the yield or conditions disclosed).
 (g) MULTIPLE INTERESTS IN 1 ACCOUNT- If more than 1 person holds an interest
 in any account--
 (1) the minimum and maximum amounts of liability under subsection (a)(2)(A)
 for any failure to comply with the requirements of this Act shall apply
 with respect to such account; and
 (2) the court shall determine the manner in which the amount of any such
 liability with respect to such account shall be distributed among such
 persons.
 (h) CONTINUING FAILURE TO DISCLOSE-
 (1) CERTAIN CONTINUING FAILURES TREATED AS 1 VIOLATION- Except as provided
 in paragraph (2), the continuing failure of any depository institution to
 disclose any particular term required to be disclosed under this Act with
 respect to a particular account shall be treated as a single violation for
 purposes of determining the amount of any liability of such institution
 under subsection (a) for such failure to disclose.
 (2) SUBSEQUENT FAILURE TO DISCLOSE- The continuing failure of any depository
 institution to disclose any particular term required to be disclosed under
 this Act with respect to a particular account after judgment has been
 rendered in favor of the account holder in connection with a prior failure
 to disclose such term with respect to such account shall be treated as a
 subsequent violation for purposes of determining liability under subsection
 (a).
 (3) COORDINATION WITH SECTION 9- This subsection shall not limit or otherwise
 affect the enforcement power under section 9 of any agency referred to in
 subsection (a) of such section.
SEC. 11. CREDIT UNIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- No regulation prescribed by the Board under this Act shall
 apply directly with respect to any depository institution described in
 clause (iv) of section 19(b)(1)(A) of the Federal Reserve Act.
 (b) REGULATIONS PRESCRIBED BY THE NCUA- Within 90 days of the effective
 date of any regulation prescribed by the Board under this Act, the
 National Credit Union Administration Board shall prescribe a regulation
 substantially similar to the regulation prescribed by the Board taking
 into account the unique nature of credit unions and the limitations under
 which credit unions may pay dividends on member accounts.
SEC. 12. EFFECT ON STATE LAW.
 This Act does not annul, alter, or affect the laws of any State relating to
 the disclosure of information in connection with terms of deposit accounts,
 except to the extent that those laws are inconsistent with the provisions
 of this Act, and then only to the extent of the inconsistency.
SEC. 13. DEFINITIONS.
 For the purposes of this Act--
 (1) DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION- The term ` depository institution ' has the
 meaning given such term in clauses (i) through (vi) of section 19(b)(1)(A)
 of the Federal Reserve Act.
 (2) BOARD- The term `Board' means the Board of Governors of the Federal
 Reserve System.
 (3) ACCOUNT- The term `account' means any account offered to 1 or more
 individuals or an unincorporated nonbusiness association of individuals by
 a depository institution into which a customer deposits funds, including
 demand accounts, time accounts, negotiable order of withdrawal accounts,
 and share draft accounts.
 (4) INTEREST- The term `interest' includes dividends paid with respect to
 share draft accounts which are accounts within the meaning of paragraph (3).
 (5) MULTIPLE RATE ACCOUNT- The term `multiple rate account' means any
 account that has 2 or more annual rates of simple interest which take
 effect in succeeding periods and which are known at the time of disclosure.
 (6) ANNUAL PERCENTAGE YIELD- The term `annual percentage yield' shall be
 equal to the total amount of interest that would be received on a $100
 deposit under the terms described in paragraphs (3) and (4) of section 4(c)
 over a year, expressed as a percentage calculated by a method which shall
 be prescribed by the Board in regulations.
Passed the House of Representatives October 22, 1990.
Attest:
Clerk.
HR 736 EH----2