HR 2325 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 2325
To establish a domestic liability and compensation system for oil pollution
from vessels and facilities and to implement the 1984 Protocols to the 1969
Civil Liability and 1971 Fund Conventions concerning seagoing tanker-source
oil pollution.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
May 11, 1989
Mr. DAVIS (by request) introduced the following bill; which was referred
jointly to the Committees on Public Works and Transportation, Merchant Marine
and Fisheries, and Ways and Means
A BILL
To establish a domestic liability and compensation system for oil pollution
from vessels and facilities and to implement the 1984 Protocols to the 1969
Civil Liability and 1971 Fund Conventions concerning seagoing tanker-source
oil pollution.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE, STATEMENT OF FINDINGS AND DECLARATION OF PURPOSE,
AND TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `Comprehensive Oil Pollution
 Liability and Compensation Act of 1989'.
 (b) STATEMENT OF FINDINGS AND DECLARATION OF PURPOSE- (1) Major oilspill
 incidents can cause serious environmental and economic damage. Oilspills
 pollute beaches, damage the commercial fishing industry, harm private
 property and natural resources, and can have other significant environmental
 and economic effects. Unlike other types of damages resulting from hazardous
 substances incidents, oilspills pose unique problems and demand unique
 solutions.
 (2) Therefore, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the United States
 and the purpose of this Act to create a unique liability and compensation
 system to address the unique problems presented by oilspills, under which
 it shall be the primary responsibility of the parties responsible for
 a vessel or facility from which oil is discharged to fund the cleanup
 of such pollution when it occurs, and compensate those damaged by such
 pollution. Removal and restoration costs which exceed the limits of liability
 of the responsible party will be compensated from a fund financed from
 fees on oil. Economic damages which exceed the limits of liability of
 the responsible party may be recovered under applicable State laws. The
 Act authorizes the President to order a responsible party to undertake a
 removal action and makes conforming changes to civil and criminal liability
 provisions to accomplish this.
 The goal of this Act is threefold: To strengthen the four existing oil
 pollution liability and compensation regimes under the Federal Water
 Pollution Control Act, the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Authorization Act, the
 Deepwater Port Act, and the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act to create a
 unified and comprehensive program; two, to establish a domestic liability
 and compensation system financed by vessel and facility owners and the
 oil industry to compensate the United States Government, the States and
 Indian tribes for removal and restoration costs associated with oilspills;
 and three, to provide greater protection from foreign tanker oilspills
 by implementing the 1984 Protocols to the 1969 Civil Liability and 1971
 Fund Conventions.
 (c) Table of Contents-
Sec. 1. Short title and table of contents.
TITLE I--OIL POLLUTION LIABILITY AND COMPENSATION
Sec. 101. Definitions.
Sec. 102. Liability.
Sec. 103. Uses of the fund.
Sec. 104. Claims procedure.
Sec. 105. Designation and advertisement.
Sec. 106. Subrogation.
Sec. 107. Financial responsibility.
Sec. 108. Litigation, jurisdiction, and venue.
Sec. 109. Relationship to other law.
Sec. 110. Effective date.
Sec. 111. Federal cause of action based on State or other Federal law.
TITLE II--CONFORMING AMENDMENTS
Sec. 201. Trans-Alaska pipeline fund.
Sec. 202. Intervention on the High Seas Act.
Sec. 203. Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
Sec. 204. Deepwater Port Act.
Sec. 205. Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act Amendments.
Sec. 206. Enforcement of Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
Sec. 207. Title 26, United States Code
TITLE III--IMPLEMENTATION OF INTERNATIONAL CONVENTIONS
Sec. 301. Definitions.
Sec. 302. Applicability of conventions.
Sec. 303. Recognition of international fund.
Sec. 304. Action in United States courts.
Sec. 305. Contribution to international fund.
Sec. 306. Recognition of foreign judgments.
Sec. 307. Financial responsibility.
Sec. 308. Regulations.
TITLE I--OIL POLLUTION LIABILITY AND COMPENSATION
SEC. 101. DEFINITIONS.
 For the purposes of this Act, the term--
 (1) `act of God' means an unanticipated grave natural disaster or other
 natural phenomenon of an exceptional, inevitable, and irresistible
 character the effects of which could not have been prevented or avoided
 by the exercise of due care or foresight;
 (2) `claim' means a demand in writing for a sum certain;
 (3) `claimant' means any person who presents a claim for compensation
 under this Act;
 (4) `costs', except where the context indicates otherwise, means removal
 costs, restoration costs, and restoration assessment costs;
 (5) `damages' means damages for economic loss specified in section 102(a)(3)
 of this Act;
 (6) `discharge' means any emission (other than natural seepage), intentional
 or unintentional, and includes, but is not limited to, spilling, leaking,
 pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, or dumping;
 (7) `exclusive economic zone' means the zone established by Presidential
 Proclamation numbered 5030, dated March 10, 1983;
 (8) `facility' means an onshore facility or an offshore facility other
 than a public facility;
 (9) `foreign offshore unit' means a structure or group of structures which
 is located, in whole or in part, in the territorial sea or on or over
 the continental shelf of a foreign country and is or was used for one or
 more of the following purposes: exploring for, drilling for, producing,
 storing handling, transferring, processing, or transporting oil produced
 from the seabed beneath the foreign country's territorial sea or from the
 foreign country's continental shelf;
 (10) `Fund' means the Oilspill Liability Trust Fund, established by section
 9509 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954;
 (11) `gross ton' means tonnage measured in accordance with the provisions
 of the International Convention on Tonnage Measurement of Ships, 1969;
 (12) `guarantor' means any person, other than the responsible party,
 who provides evidence of financial responsibility for a responsible party
 under this Act;
 (13) `incident' means any occurrence or series of occurrences having the
 same origin, involving one or more vessels, facilities, or any combination
 thereof, resulting in the discharge or substantial threat of discharge
 of oil;
 (14) `Indian tribe' means any Indian tribe, band, nation, or other organized
 group or community, but not including any Alaska Native regional or village
 corporation, which is recognized as eligible for the special programs and
 services provided by the United States to Indians because of their status
 as Indians;
 (15) `lessee' means a person holding a leasehold interest in an oil or gas
 lease on lands beneath navigable waters (as such term is defined in section
 2 of the Submerged Lands Act (43 U.S.C. 1301)) or on submerged lands of
 the Outer Continental Shelf, granted or maintained under applicable State
 law or the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act;
 (16) `mobile offshore drilling unit' (MODU) means a vessel capable of use
 as an offshore facility;
 (17) `National Contingency Plan' means the National Contingency Plan
 published under section 311(c) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or
 revised pursuant to section 105 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
 Compensation, and Liability Act;
 (18) `natural resources' includes land, fish, wildlife, biota, water, ground
 water, drinking water supplies, and other such resources belonging to,
 managed by, held in trust by, appertaining to, or otherwise controlled by
 the United States (including the resources of the exclusive economic zone),
 any State or local government or Indian tribe, or any foreign government;
 (19) `navigable waters' means the waters of the United States, including
 the territorial sea;
 (20) `offshore facility' means--
 (A) a facility of any kind (other than a vessel, or a public vessel or
 facility), which is located, in whole or in part, on lands beneath navigable
 waters (as such term is defined in section 2 of the Submerged Lands Act (43
 U.S.C. 1301) or on the Outer Continental Shelf and is or was used for one
 or more of the following purposes: exploring for, drilling for, producing,
 storing, handling, transferring, processing, or transporting oil produced
 from lands beneath navigable waters of the Outer Continental Shelf; and
 (B) also means a deepwater port licensed under the Deepwater Port Act of
 1974, as amended;
 (21) `oil' means crude petroleum oil, residual fuel oil, any refined
 petroleum product or fraction or residue therefrom, but does not include
 petrochemicals;
 (22) `onshore facility' means any facility (including, but not limited to,
 motor vehicles, pipelines and rolling stock) of any kind, other than a
 public facility, any portion of which is located in, on, or under, any
 land within the United States other than submerged land;
 (23) `owner or operator' means (A) in the case of a vessel, any person
 owning, operating, or chartering by demise, such vessel, and (B) in the
 case of an onshore facility, and an offshore facility, any person owning
 or operating such onshore facility or offshore facility, and (C) in the
 case of any abandoned offshore facility, the person who owned or operated
 such facility immediately prior to such abandonment;
 (24) `person' means an individual, corporation, partnership, association,
 State, municipality, commission, or political subdivision of a State,
 or any interstate body;
 (25) `person otherwise subject to the jurisdiction of the United States'
 means any person, whether natural, corporate, or otherwise, who is a
 citizen or national of the United States;
 (26) `permittee' means a person holding an authorization, license, or
 permit for geological exploration issued under section 11 of the Outer
 Continental Shelf Lands Act or applicable State law;
 (27) `public facility' means any facility owned or operated by the United
 States, either directly or by contract with a private party;
 (28) `public vessel' means a vessel owned or bareboat chartered (or
 chartered by demise) and operated by the United States, or by a State or
 political subdivision thereof, or by a foreign nation, except when such
 vessel is engaged in commerce;
 (29) `remove' or `removal' refers to removal of the oil from the water
 and shorelines or the taking of such other actions as may be necessary to
 minimize or mitigate damage to the public health or welfare, including,
 but not limited to, damage to fish, shellfish, wildlife, and public and
 private property, shorelines, and beaches and including actions taken with
 respect to a substantial threat of a discharge;
 (30) `removal costs' means the costs of removal taken after a discharge of
 oil has occurred, or, where there was a substantial threat of a discharge
 of oil, the costs and action taken to prevent, minimize, or mitigate
 oil pollution from that incident. Such removal costs are (1) actual costs
 incurred by the United States, or when under the direction of the responsible
 Federal official, a State or an Indian tribe, not inconsistent with the
 National Contingency Plan, and (2) any other necessary costs of response
 incurred by any other person consistent with the National Contingency Plan.
 (31) `responsible party' means the following:
 (A) VESSELS- In the case of a vessel, the responsible party is any person
 owning, operating, or chartering by demise, the vessel.
 (B) FACILITIES- In the case of a facility (including a pipeline but not
 including any other offshore facility), the responsible party is any person
 owning or operating the facility.
 (C) OFFSHORE FACILITIES- In the case of an offshore facility (other than
 a pipeline or a deepwater port licensed under the Deepwater Port Act of
 1974), and except as provided in section 102(a)(5), the responsible party
 is the lessee or permittee of the area in which the facility is located,
 or the holder of a right of use and easement granted under applicable
 State law or the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act for the area in which
 the facility is located (where the holder is a different person than the
 lessee or permittee).
 (D) DEEPWATER PORTS- In the case of a deepwater port licensed under the
 Deepwater Port Act of 1974, the responsible party is the licensee.
 (E) ABANDONMENT- In the case of an abandoned vessel, an onshore facility,
 or an offshore facility, or the expiration of a lease, permit, license,
 or right of way, responsible parties shall be the persons who were, or
 would have been, responsible parties immediately prior to the abandonment
 of the vessel, onshore facility, or offshore facility, or the expiration
 of the lease, permit, license, or right of way: Provided, That this Act
 shall not be construed as authorizing abandonment of vessels or facilities;
 (32) `restoration costs' means the sums necessary for the reasonable
 restoration or replacement of natural resources, or reasonable acquisition
 of equivalent natural resources, which have been injured, destroyed,
 or lost, including--
 `(A) as restoration costs, the sums necessary for the restoration or
 replacement of the land, fish, wildlife, biota, water, drinking water
 supplies and other such natural resources, or acquisition of their
 equivalent, which have been injured, destroyed, or lost, and,
 `(B) costs of developing and obtaining plans referred to in paragraph
 (3) of subsection (e) of section 102 of this title and the costs of
 determining the assessment costs under clause (A) of this subsection and
 shall also include the sums necessary for the reasonable restoration or
 replacement of real estate, fish, wildlife, biota, water, ground water,
 drinking water supplies, and other such resources which are privately owned,
 or reasonable acquisition of their equivalent, which have been injured,
 destroyed, or lost, including restoration assessment costs.
 (33) `Secretary' means the Secretary of Transportation;
 (34) `State' means a State of the United States, Guam, Puerto Rico, the
 Virgin Islands, American Samoa, the District of Columbia, the Northern
 Mariana Islands, the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, and any other
 territory or possession of the United States.
 (35) `subsistence use' means the customary and traditional uses by
 rural residents of wild, renewable resources for direct personal or
 family consumption, such as food, shelter, fuel, clothing, tools, and
 transportation; for making and selling of handicraft articles out of inedible
 byproducts of fish and wildlife resources taken for personal or family
 consumption; for barter, or sharing for personal or family consumption;
 and for customary trade.
 (36) `tanker' means a vessel constructed or adapted for the carriage of oil
 in bulk or in commercial quantities as cargo; except that the term does
 not include a nonself-propelled vessel of less than three thousand gross
 tons carrying oil in bulk as cargo or in residue from cargo and operating
 on waters of the United States lying inside the baseline from which the
 territorial sea is measured or on waters outside such baseline which are
 part of the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway;
 (37) `territorial sea' means the territorial sea established under
 Presidential Proclamation numbered 5928, December 27, 1988.
 (38) `United States' mean the several States of the United States, the
 District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa,
 the United States Virgin Islands, the Commonwealth of the Northern Marianas,
 and any other territory or possession over which the United States has
 jurisdiction; and
 (39) `vessel' means every description of watercraft or other artificial
 contrivance used, or capable of being used, as a means of transportation
 on water other than a public vessel.
SEC. 102. LIABILITY.
 (a) ELEMENTS OF LIABILITY- (1) JOINT, SEVERAL, AND STRICT LIABILITY-
 Notwithstanding any other provision of law and subject only to the defenses
 in subsection (b), the responsible party or parties for a vessel or a
 facility from which oil is discharged, or which poses the substantial
 threat of a discharge of oil, into or upon the navigable waters or
 adjoining shorelines or the waters of the exclusive economic zone or a
 party liable under paragraph (5) is both jointly and severally liable,
 and strictly liable for the costs, and damages specified in paragraph
 (2) and (3) that arise out of or directly result from such discharge or
 threat of discharge. In addition to actions brought against such responsible
 parties or third parties, such costs and damages shall constitute a maritime
 lien on any vessel owned by such responsible parties or third parties and
 may be recovered in an action in rem in the district court of the United
 States for any district within which any such vessel may be found. In the
 event that a party is determined to be less than 30 per centum liable,
 then that party shall be severally and not jointly liable for damages.
 (2) COVERED REMOVAL COSTS AND RESTORATION COSTS- (A) REMOVAL COSTS- Removal
 costs shall be recoverable by any claimant incurring the removal costs.
 (B) RESTORATION COSTS- restoration costs shall be recoverable by the United
 States trustee, State trustee, or Indian tribal trustee.
 (C) REBUTTABLE PRESUMPTION- There shall be a presumption, rebuttable only
 by clear and convincing evidence, that--
 (i) all removal costs actually incurred by the United States, including
 all internal agency costs necessitated by the incident, were consistent
 with the National Contingency Plan;
 (ii) all determinations made by the United States pursuant to section 301(C)
 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act,
 and implementing regulations, as to the extent of injury to, destruction of,
 or loss of natural resources and the monetary amount of damages resulting,
 including the cost of assessing such injury, destruction, or loss, are
 reasonable; and
 (iii) all compensation actually paid by the Fund pursuant to claims
 submitted under section 104 was in a proper amount and that such costs or
 damages were not attributable to any act or omission on the part of the
 United States or any entity from which it acquired rights by subrogation.
 (3) COVERED DAMAGES- The damages for economic loss referred to in paragraph
 (1) are the following:
 (A) REAL OR PERSONAL PROPERTY- Damages for injury to, or economic losses
 resulting from destruction of, real or personal property (not otherwise
 recoverable under paragraph (2)(B) of this subsection), which shall be
 recoverable by a claimant who owns or leases such property.
 (B) SUBSISTENCE USE- Damages for loss of subsistence use of natural
 resources, which shall be recoverable by any claimant who so used natural
 resources which have been injured, destroyed, or lost.
 (C) REVENUES- Damages equal to the loss of property taxes, royalties, rents,
 or net profit shares, for a period not to exceed one year, due to the injury,
 destruction, or loss of natural resources, which shall be recoverable by the
 Government of the United States, a State, or a political subdivision thereof.
 (D) PROFITS AND EARNING CAPABILITY- Damages equal to the loss of profits or
 impairment of earning capacity due to the injury, destruction, or loss of
 natural resources, which shall be recoverable by any claimant who derives
 at least 25 per centum of his or her earnings from the activities which
 utilize such natural resources, or, if such activities are seasonal in
 nature, 25 per centum of his or her earnings during the applicable season.
 (4) Division of responsibility for modu discharges on or above the water-
 (A) TREATED FIRST AS A TANKER- For purposes of determining the responsible
 party and applying this Act, a mobile offshore drilling unit which is being
 used as an offshore facility shall be deemed to be a tanker with respect
 to the discharge, or the substantial threat of a discharge, of oil on or
 above the surface of the water, except as provided in subparagraph (B).
 (B) TREATED AS A FACILITY FOR EXCESS LIABILITY- To the extent that removal
 costs and damages from any incident described in subparagraph (A) exceed
 the amount for which the responsible party is liable under subparagraph
 (A) (as such amount may be limited under subsection (c)(1)(A)), the mobile
 offshore drilling unit shall be deemed to be an offshore facility.
 (5) LIABILITY OF THIRD PARTIES- (A) IN GENERAL- In any case where the
 responsible party for a vessel or facility can prove that an incident was
 caused solely by an act or omission of one or more third parties (or in
 the case of the United States Government, solely by the negligence of that
 Government) in accordance with subsection (b)(1)(B) (or solely by such an
 act or omission or negligence in combination with an act of God or an act
 of war), such third party or parties shall be liable under this section.
 (B) LIMITATION APPLIED- (i) OWNER OR OPERATOR OF VESSEL OR FACILITY-
 If such third party or parties are the owner or operator of a vessel or
 facility which caused the incident, the liability of such third party
 or parties shall be subject to the limits provided in subsection (c),
 as applied with respect to such vessel or facility.
 (ii) OTHER CASES- In any other case, the liability of such third party or
 parties shall not exceed the limitation which would have been applicable
 to the responsible party of the vessel or facility from which the discharge
 actually occurred if such responsible party were liable.
 (C) This subparagraph applies to cases to which subparagraph (A) of this
 paragraph applies, when the vessel or facility from which the discharge
 occurred carried oil as cargo, or handled or stored oil in bulk. The
 responsible party of that vessel or facility shall pay all costs or damages
 for which it would otherwise have been liable absent the defenses provided
 under subsection (b)(1)(B), (b)(1)(C), or (b)(1)(D) of this section. Upon
 such payments the responsible party shall be subrogated to all rights to
 recover such costs or damages under this paragraph.
 (b) EXCLUSIVE DEFENSES TO LIABILITY- (1) COMPLETE DEFENSES- Except when
 the responsible party has failed or refused to report the incident where
 required by law and the responsible party knows or has reason to know of
 the incident, and except with respect to an offshore facility, there is
 no liability under subsection (a) if the responsible party proves that
 the incident was solely caused by one, or any combination of the following:
 (A) an act of God, an act of war;
 (B) an act or omission of a third party other than an employee or agent
 of the defendant, or than one whose act or omission occurs in connection
 with a contractual relationship, existing directly or indirectly, with the
 responsible party, if the responsible party establishes by a preponderance
 of the evidence that (a) he exercised due care in light of all relevant
 facts and circumstances, and (b) he took precautions against foreseeable
 acts or omissions of any such third party and the consequences that could
 foreseeably result from such acts or omissions; and
 (C) the negligence of the United States Government, excluding any actions
 which may be taken respecting the discretionary functions decisions
 of location, type, and numbers of aids to navigation or the conduct of
 vessel inspection and merchant marine personnel licensing activities or
 the acquisition and timely dissemination of navigational data to users
 and the identification, survey, and charting of navigational obstacles.
 (2) BARS TO RECOVERY BY PARTICULAR CLAIMANTS- A claimant may not recover
 under subsection (a)--
 (A) as to a particular claimant, other than a natural resource trustee
 acting in its capacity as a natural resource trustee, the incident is
 caused, in whole or in part, by the willful misconduct of that claimant; or
 (B) as to a particular claimant, other than a natural resource trustee
 acting in its capacity as a natural resource trustee, to the extent that
 the incident is caused by the negligence of that claimant except that
 the negligence of any entity of the United States Government shall not
 be imputed to the Fund for the purposes of this paragraph in an action
 brought by the Fund under this title, other than an action for a claim
 which the Fund has paid to that entity.
 (c) LIMITS ON LIABILITY- (1) GENERAL RULE- The total of the liability of a
 responsible party under subsection (a) and any removal costs incurred by,
 or on behalf of, the responsible party with respect to each incident shall
 not exceed--
 (A) $500 per gross ton or $5,000,000, whichever is greater (but not to
 exceed $78,000,000), for any tanker;
 (B) $300 per gross ton or $500,000, whichever is greater, for any other
 vessel; or
 (C) $75,000,000 for any facility.
 (2) EXCEPTIONS- (A) PROXIMATE CAUSE- Paragraph (1) shall not apply if the
 incident was proximately caused by--
 (i) willful misconduct within the privity and knowledge of the responsible
 party; or
 (ii) a violation, within the privity and knowledge of the responsible party,
 of applicable Federal safety, construction, or operating regulations.
 (B) FAILURE OR REFUSAL OF RESPONSIBLE PARTY- Paragraph (1) shall not apply
 if the responsible party fails or refuses--
 (i) to report the incident where required by law and the responsible party
 knows or has reason to know of the incident; or
 (ii) to provide all reasonable cooperation and assistance requested by a
 responsible official in connection with removal activities.
 (3) ADJUSTING LIMITS OF LIABILITY- (A) FACILITIES- The Secretary, and
 with respect to Outer Continental Shelf facilities the Secretary and the
 Secretary of the Department of the Interior, is authorized to establish by
 regulation, with respect to any class or category of facility a maximum limit
 of liability under this section of less than $75,000,000, but not less than
 $8,000,000, taking into account the size, storage capacity, oil throughput,
 proximity to sensitive areas, type of oil handled, history of discharges, and
 other factors relevant to risks posed by the class or category of facility.
 (B) PERIODIC REPORTS- The Secretary shall, from time to time, report to
 the Congress on the desirability of adjusting the limits of liability
 specified in paragraph (1) of this subsection.
 (d) LIABILITY FOR INTEREST- (1) GENERAL RULE- The responsible party or his
 guarantor shall be liable to the claimant for interest on the amount paid
 in satisfaction of a claim under this section for the period described in
 paragraph (2).
 (2) PERIOD- (A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the
 period for which interest shall be paid under paragraph (1) is the period
 beginning on the date on which removal costs are incurred and, for damages
 on the date on which the claim is presented to the responsible party, or
 guarantor, and ending on the date on which the claimant is paid, inclusive.
 (B) EXCLUSION OF PERIOD DUE TO OFFER BY GUARANTOR- If the responsible
 party or guarantor offers to the claimant an amount equal to or greater
 than that finally paid in satisfaction of the claim, the period described
 in subparagraph (A) shall not include the period beginning on the date
 such offer is made and ending on the date such offer is accepted. If such
 offer is made within sixty days after the date upon which the claim is
 presented pursuant to section 104(a), the period described in subparagraph
 (A) shall not include any period before such offer is accepted.
 (C) EXCLUSION OF PERIODS IN INTEREST OF JUSTICE- The period described in
 paragraph (A) shall not include any period--
 (i) during which a claimant is not paid due to reasons beyond the control
 of the responsible party; and
 (ii) if it would not serve the interest of justice to include such period.
 (D) CALCULATION OF INTEREST- The interest paid under this subsection shall
 be calculated at the average of the highest rate for commercial and finance
 company paper of maturities of one hundred and eighty days or less obtaining
 on each of the days included within the period for which interest must be
 paid to the claimant, as published in the Federal Reserve bulletin.
 (E) INTEREST NOT SUBJECT TO LIABILITY LIMITS- Interest under this paragraph
 shall be in addition to damages for which claims may be asserted under
 section 102 and shall be paid without regard to any limitation of liability
 under subsection (c)(1) of this section. The payment of interest under
 this subsection by a guarantor shall be subject to section 107(e).
 (e) NATURAL RESOURCES- (1) LIABILITY- In the case of an injury to,
 destruction of, or loss of natural resources under this section, liability
 shall be--
 (A) to the United States Government for natural resources belonging to,
 managed by, controlled by, or appertaining to the United States,
 (B) to any State for natural resources within the State or belonging to,
 managed by, controlled by, or appertaining to such State, and
 (C) to any Indian tribe for natural resources belonging to, managed by,
 or appertaining to such tribe.
 (D) where subsection (f) of this section applies, to the government of a
 foreign country for natural resources belonging to, managed by, controlled
 by, or appertaining to such country.
 (2) DESIGNATION OF TRUSTEES- (A) IN GENERAL- The President or the authorized
 representative of any Indian tribe, or the authorized representative
 of any State or of the foreign government, shall act on behalf of the
 public or Indian tribe as trustee of such natural resources to recover
 restoration costs.
 (B) FEDERAL TRUSTEES- The President shall designate the Federal officials
 who shall act on behalf of the public as trustees for natural resources
 under this Act. Such officials shall develop and adopt a plan for the
 reasonable restoration or replacement of, or the reasonable acquisition
 of the equivalent of their resources under their trusteeship that have
 been injured, destroyed, or lost as a result of a discharge of oil and
 may upon request of and reimbursement from a State or Indian tribe and at
 the Federal official's discretion develop and adopt such a plan for those
 natural resources under the State's or tribe's trusteeship.
 (C) STATE TRUSTEES- The Governor of each State shall designate State
 officials who may act on behalf of the public as trustee for natural
 resources under this Act and shall notify the President of such
 designations. Such officials shall develop and adopt a plan for the
 reasonable restoration or replacement of, or the reasonable acquisition
 of the equivalent of those natural resources under the trusteeship.
 (D) NOTICE AND OPPORTUNITY TO BE HEARD- Plans shall be developed and adopted
 under subparagraphs (B) and (C) only after the plans have been made public
 and the public has had an opportunity to submit written comments on the
 plans. Such a hearing shall not constitute an adjudication under section
 504 and the United States Code.
 (E) INDIAN TRIBAL TRUSTEES- The governing body of any Indian tribe shall
 designate tribal officials who may act on behalf of the tribe and its
 members as trustee for natural resources under this Act and shall notify the
 President of such designations. Such officials shall develop and adopt a plan
 for the reasonable restoration or replacement, or the reasonable acquisition
 of the equivalent of those natural resources under the trusteeship.
 (3) DETERMINATION OF COSTS- (A) IN GENERAL- The measure of costs in any
 action under this section for injury to, destruction of, or loss of natural
 resources shall be limited to the sums necessary for the reasonable
 restoration or replacement of the natural resources, or reasonable
 acquisition of equivalent natural resources, so injured, destroyed,
 or lost. Monetary value of the loss of use of injured, destroyed, or
 lost natural resources may be recovered from persons liable under and in
 accordance with section 102 of this Act, but not from the Fund.
 (B) DETERMINE COSTS WITH RESPECT TO PLAN- Costs shall be determined under
 subparagraph (A) with respect to plans adopted under paragraph (2) (B)
 and (C).
 (C) NO DOUBLE RECOVERY- There shall be no double recovery under this Act
 for natural resources restoration costs, including the costs of restoration
 assessment, restoration, replacement, or equivalent acquisition for the
 same incident and natural resource.
 (4) USE OF RECOVERED SUMS- Sums recovered by the United States Government or
 a State or Indian tribe as trustee under this subsection shall be retained
 by the trustee, for use only to perform restoration assessment or reimburse
 trustees for funds expended for removal, restoration assessment, restoration,
 replacement, or acquisition of the equivalent of such natural resources. Sums
 recovered on the basis of the loss of use of injured, destroyed, or lost
 natural resources shall be used for the general enhancement of the ecosystem
 of which the injured, destroyed, or lost natural resources were a part,
 for the purpose of restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical,
 and biological integrity of the affected ecosystem.
 (5) CIVIL PENALTY- This paragraph applies to cases in which, as the result
 of an incident, natural resources, which cannot be restored or replaced and
 for which no equivalent may be acquired, are destroyed by oil pollution. In
 such a case the President or authorized representative of a State or Indian
 tribe, acting under this subsection as trustee, may request the Attorney
 General to bring an action in court to recover from the responsible party,
 or person in charge of the vessel, or facility, a civil penalty of no
 more than $10,000,000 which shall be separate from and in addition to any
 liability of the responsible party for the incident under section 102(c)
 of this Act. In determining the amount of civil penalty the court shall
 consider, inter alia, any culpability of the responsible party, or person
 in charge, any economic benefit derived by the responsible party, or person
 in charge, in connection with the incident, the uniqueness of the natural
 resource destroyed, and the nature and extent of any efforts taken by the
 responsible party, or person in charge, to prevent the destruction of the
 natural resource. No penalty may be imposed under this paragraph which
 is consistent with international law. Recoveries under this paragraph
 shall be paid to the trustee to be used for the general enhancement of
 the ecosystem of which the destroyed natural resource was a part, for the
 purpose of restoring and maintaining the chemical physical and biological
 integrity of the affected ecosystem. Any determination made by a trustee
 under this subsection that a natural resource has been destroyed and that
 it cannot be restored or replaced, and no equivalent for it may be acquired
 shall be within the complete and unreviewable discretion of the trustee.
 (f) RECOVERY BY FOREIGN CLAIMANTS- (1) IN GENERAL- A foreign claimant
 may only recover costs and damages under this Act in accordance with
 this subsection.
 (2) COVERED DISCHARGES- A foreign claimant may recover only if the discharge
 of oil was from--
 (A) a facility,
 (B) a vessel in the navigable waters of the United States, or
 (C) a tanker that received oil at the terminal of the pipeline constructed
 under the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Authorization Act for transportation to a
 port in the United States, the incident having occurred prior to offloading
 at such port, and resulted in the presence of oil in or on the territorial
 sea, internal waters, or adjacent shoreline of a foreign country.
 (3) REQUIREMENTS- A foreign claimant may only recover if--
 (A) the claimant first seeks compensation under title III;
 (B) the claimant has not been otherwise compensated for the costs or
 damages; and
 (C) recovery is authorized by a treaty or executive agreement between the
 United States and the claimant's country, or the Secretary of State, in
 consultation with the Attorney General and other appropriate officials,
 has certified that the claimant's country provides a comparable remedy
 for United States' claimants.
 (4) EXCEPTION FOR CANADIAN CLAIMANTS RESPECTING TRANS-ALASKA PIPELINE OIL-
 Paragraph (3)(C) shall not apply with respect to recovery by a resident
 of Canada in the case of an incident described in paragraph (2)(C).
 (5) DEFINITION OF FOREIGN CLAIMANT- For purposes of this subsection, the
 term `foreign claimant' means any person residing in a foreign country,
 the government of a foreign country, or any agency or political subdivision
 thereof.
 (g) RECOVERY OF REMOVAL COSTS BY RESPONSIBLE PARTY- (1) IN GENERAL- The
 responsible party for a vessel or facility from which oil is discharged,
 or which posed the substantial threat of a discharge of oil, may assert
 a claim against the Fund for removal costs consistent with the National
 Contingency Plan under subsection (a) only if he can show that--
 (A) he is entitled to a defense to liability under subsection (b), or
 (B) he is entitled to a limitation of liability under subsection (c)
 and has exceeded that limitation.
 (2) EXTENT OF RECOVERY- A responsible party who is entitled to a limitation
 of liability, may assert a claim against the Fund under paragraph (1)
 of subsection (a) only to the extent that the sum of the removal costs
 incurred by the responsible party plus the amounts paid by the responsible
 party or by the guarantor on behalf of the responsible party for claims
 asserted under subsection (a) exceeds the amount to which the total of
 the liability under subsection (a) and removal costs incurred by, or on
 behalf of, the responsible party is limited under subsection (c).
 (h) CONTRIBUTION- A person including a responsible party may bring an
 action for contribution against any other person, not to include the United
 States, who is liable or potentially liable under this section. Such an
 action shall be brought in accordance with section 108.
 (i) INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENTS- (1) IN GENERAL- No indemnification, hold
 harmless, or similar agreement or conveyance shall be effective to transfer
 the liability imposed under this section from the responsible party for any
 vessel or facility or from any person who may be liable for an incident
 under this section to any other person. Nothing in this subsection shall
 bar any agreement to insure, hold harmless, or indemnify a party to such
 agreement for any liability under this section.
 (2) RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER CAUSES OF ACTION- Nothing in this Act, including
 the provisions of paragraph (1) of this subsection, shall bar a cause of
 action that a responsible party subject to liability under this section,
 or a guarantor, has or would have, by reason of subrogation or otherwise
 against any person.
SEC. 103. USES OF THE FUND.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Fund shall be available to the Secretary without
 further appropriations for--
 (1) the cost of carrying out subsections (c), (d), (i), and (l) of section
 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, and sections 5 and 7 of
 the Intervention on the High Seas Act, and the reasonable costs incurred
 by the President, a Governor of a State, or equivalent representative of
 any Indian Tribe as trustee in assessing damaged natural resources and
 preparing a restoration and acquisition plan;
 (2) the payment of recoverable costs described in section 102(a)(2) not
 otherwise compensated under this Act;
 (3) the payment of Federal administrative, personnel, and enforcement
 costs and expenses, including audits of the Fund, reasonably necessary
 for and incidental to the administration and implementation of this Act,
 the cost of providing equipment, and other costs for functions related to
 pollution response, and
 (4) the payment of all contributions to the International Fund under title
 III of this Act necessary to comply with United States treaty obligations.
 (b) CLAIMS NOT COVERED BY THE FUND- The Fund shall not be available to
 pay any claim for costs--
 (1) as to a particular claimant, if the incident of oil or economic loss is
 caused, in whole or in part, by the gross negligence or willful misconduct
 of that claimant;
 (2) as to a particular claimant, to the extent that the incident is caused
 by the negligence of that claimant;
 (3) as to a claim for removal costs by a responsible party who is not
 entitled to assert such a claim under subsection (g) of section 102; or
 (4) as to a claim by the United States, where the negligence of the United
 States is the sole cause of the discharge.
 (c) MAXIMUM AMOUNT PAYABLE FROM FUND- The maximum amount which may be paid
 from the Fund with respect to any incident in combination with payment,
 if any, under the International Convention on the Establishment of an
 International Fund for Compensation of Oil Pollution Damage, 1984, shall
 not exceed $500,000,000. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the
 President is authorized to waive the limit imposed by this subsection and
 to prescribe a higher limit upon a determination that such a waiver is
 necessary and in the best interests of the country.
 (d) FEDERAL, STATE, AND TRIBAL OFFICIALS WHO MAY OBLIGATE FROM THE FUND-
 The Secretary is authorized to promulgate regulations setting up an
 advancing arrangement where one or more Federal officials are designated
 who may obligate money in the Fund in accordance with subsection (a)
 of this section or portions thereof. The Secretary is also authorized to
 delegate to officials of a State with an adequate program operating under a
 cooperative agreement with the Federal Government the authority to decide
 to obligate money in the Fund and to settle claims: Provided, That before
 any such decision becomes legally effective, it must be approved by the
 Secretary or a Federal official designated pursuant to this subsection.
 (e) DRAWS BY STATE AND INDIAN TRIBAL OFFICIALS- (1) ADVANCES, FINANCING
 AGREEMENTS- Pursuant to regulations promulgated under this subsection,
 the Secretary shall issue letters of credit, guarantees, or similar
 financing to each State or tribal governing body for the purposes of this
 subsection. All sums advanced under this subsection shall be paid from the
 Fund. No sums may be advanced or provided under any financing agreement
 for the purposes of this subsection from any source other than the Fund,
 and the United States shall not be liable for such sums other than in
 accordance with this subsection and the regulations promulgated hereunder.
 (2) IMMEDIATE DRAW- Regulations promulgated under this subsection shall
 authorize without any prior condition the Governor of each State or tribal
 governing body or appropriate tribal official designated by a governing
 tribal body, or an appropriate State official designated by the Governor,
 to obligate sums advanced or provided under any financing agreement in an
 amount not to exceed $50,000 for removal costs required for the immediate
 response to a discharge or substantial threat of a discharge of oil into
 or upon the navigable waters or adjacent shorelines.
 (3) NOTIFICATION, ADDITIONAL SUM- A Governor or designee or tribal governing
 body or designee exercising the authority granted by regulations pursuant
 to paragraph (2) of this subsection shall notify the Secretary within
 twenty-four hours of any obligation made thereunder. The regulations
 promulgated under this subsection shall prescribe means by which additional
 sums may be provided to the Governor, or appropriate State official,
 tribal governing body, or appropriate tribal official, for removal costs
 required for further response to the discharge or the substantial threat
 of a discharge. Such sums may be provided as necessary.
 (4) REGULATIONS- Not later than one year after the date of the enactment
 of this Act, the Secretary shall publish proposed regulations detailing,
 inter alia, the manner in which advances and financing agreements are to
 be made under this subsection.
 (f) RIGHTS OF SUBROGATION- Payment of any claim by the Fund under this Act
 shall be subject to the United States Government acquiring by subrogation
 all rights of the claimant to recover from the responsible party, third
 party, and guarantor. In addition, the Fund may recover, in accordance with
 sections 102 and 107, any removal costs, restoration costs, and restoration
 assessment costs paid directly by the Fund from the responsible party,
 third party, and guarantor.
 (g) AUDIT- The Inspector General of the Department of Transportation shall
 audit all payments, obligations, reimbursements, or other uses of the
 Fund in the prior fiscal year, to assure that the Fund is being properly
 administered and that claims are being appropriately and expeditiously
 considered. The Inspector General shall submit to the Congress the results
 of the audits required under this subsection. Each Federal agency shall
 cooperate with the Inspector General in carrying out this subsection.
 (h) PERIOD OF LIMITATIONS FOR CLAIMS- (1) REMOVAL COSTS- No claim may
 be presented under this section for recovery of removal costs unless the
 claim is presented within three years after the date of completion of all
 removal action.
 (2) RESTORATION COSTS OR DAMAGES- No claim may be presented under this
 section for restoration costs or damages unless the claim is presented
 within three years after the date on which the injury necessitating
 such restoration costs and its connection with the discharge in question
 were reasonably discoverable with the exercise of due care, or upon the
 completion of the natural resource damage assessments or, with respect to
 restoration costs if later and to the extent applicable, the date on which
 final regulations are promulgated under section 102(e)(2)(D) of this Act.
 (i) LIMITATION ON PAYMENT FOR SAME COSTS- Where the Secretary has paid
 an amount out of the Fund for any costs specified under subsection (a),
 no other claim may be paid out of the Fund for the same costs or damages.
 (j) OBLIGATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH PLAN- (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in
 paragraph (2), amounts may be obligated from the Fund for the restoration,
 or replacement, or acquisition of natural resources only in accordance
 with a plan adopted under section 102(e)(2).
 (2) EXCEPTION- Paragraph (1) shall not apply to costs incurred in connection
 with a situation requiring action to avoid irreversible loss of natural
 resources or to prevent or reduce any continuing danger to natural resources
 or similar need for emergency action.
 (k) RECOVERY FOR WRONGFUL PAYMENT- Without regard to whether a prosecution
 is brought under section 1001 of title 18, United States Code, the Fund
 shall be entitled to recover moneys paid to a claimant. Where an action
 is brought under this subsection the court may, in addition to moneys so
 paid, award the Fund administrative costs incurred respecting such claim
 and interest on such moneys so paid.
 (l) AUTHORITY TO BORROW- (1) Notwithstanding section 9509(d) of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1954, as revised, the Secretary of the Treasury shall, at
 the request of the Secretary, advance such sums to the Fund in such amount
 and at such times are as necessary: Provided, That amounts advanced shall not
 be greater than $500,000,000; Provided further, That the aggregate amount of
 repayable advances to the Oilspill Liability Trust Fund which is outstanding
 at any one time shall not exceed $500,000,000; And provided further, That
 such advances shall be repaid with interest on or before five years from
 the date the advance is received into the Oilspill Liability Trust Fund.
 (2) Advances made pursuant to this subsection shall be repaid, and interest
 on such advances shall be paid, to the general fund of the Treasury. Such
 interest shall be at rates computed in the same manner as provided in
 section 102(d)(2)(D) and shall be compounded annually.
 (3) INVESTMENT- It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Treasury to
 invest such portion of the Fund as is not, in his or her judgment, required
 to meet current withdrawals. Such investments shall be in public debt
 securities with maturities suitable for the needs of such Fund and bearing
 interest at rates determined by the Secretary, taking into consideration
 current market yields on outstanding marketable obligations of the United
 States of comparable maturities. The income on such investments shall be
 credited to and form a part of such Fund.
SEC. 104. CLAIMS PROCEDURE.
 (a) PRESENTATION TO RESPONSIBLE PARTY OR GUARANTOR- Except as provided in
 subsection (b), all claims against the Fund for costs shall be presented
 first to all responsible parties, and the guarantor of the source designated
 under section 105(a). In a case where liability is determined in accordance
 with section 302, such claims shall be presented first to the ship's owner
 (as defined in section 301(1)) and to the international fund (as described
 in section 301(5)).
 (b) PRESENTATION TO FUND- Claims for costs may be presented first to
 the Fund--
 (1) by a responsible party who may assert a claim under section 102(g);
 (2) by the Governor of a State or Indian tribal governing body for removal
 costs incurred by that State; or
 (3) by a United States claimant in a case where a foreign offshore unit
 has discharged oil causing costs for which the Fund is liable under
 section 103(a)(2).
 (c) ELECTION- If a claim is presented in accordance with subsection (a) and--
 (1) each person to whom the claim is presented denies all liability for
 the claim, or
 (2) the claim is not settled by any person by payment within one hundred
 and eighty days after the date upon which (A) the claim was presented,
 or (B) advertising was begun pursuant to section 105(b), whichever is
 later, the claimant may elect to commence an action in court against the
 responsible part or guarantor or to present the claim to the Fund.
 (d) UNCOMPENSATED COSTS- If a claim is presented in accordance with
 subsection (a) and full ad adequate compensation is unavailable, either
 because the claim exceeds a limit of liability invoked under section 102 or
 because the responsible party and his guarantor are financially incapable
 of meeting their obligations in full, a claim for the uncompensated costs
 may be presented to the Fund.
 (e) PROCEDURE FOR CLAIMS AGAINST THE FUND- The Secretary may deny,
 compromise, or pay in full any claim against the Fund. The Secretary
 shall promulgate, and may from time to time, amend, regulations for
 the presentation, filing, processing, settlement, and adjudication of
 claims under this Act against the Fund, including but not limited to the
 prioritization of claims if necessary. No action shall be commenced against
 the Fund prior to the expiration of the period prescribed by the Secretary
 by regulation for the exhaustion of administrative remedies against the Fund.
 (f) PENDENCY OF ACTION- No claim against the Fund may be paid during the
 pendency of an action by a claimant in court to recover costs which are
 the subject of the claim.
 (g) PROVIDING COPIES OF COMPLAINTS- Whenever any action is brought under
 this chapter in a court of the United States by a plaintiff other than the
 United States, the plaintiff shall provide a copy of the complaint to the
 Attorney General of the United States and the Fund Administrator.
SEC. 105. DESIGNATION AND ADVERTISEMENT.
 (a) DESIGNATION OF SOURCE AND NOTIFICATION- When the Secretary receives
 information of an incident, he or she shall, where possible and appropriate,
 designate the source or sources of the discharge. If a designated source
 is a vessel or a facility, the Secretary shall immediately notify the
 responsible party and the guarantor, if known, of that designation.
 (b) ADVERTISEMENT BY THE RESPONSIBLE PARTY OR GUARANTOR- If a responsible
 party or guarantor fails to inform the Secretary, within five days after
 receiving notification of a designation under subsection (a), of denial of
 the designation, such party or guarantor shall advertise the designation and
 the procedures by which claims may be presented to such party or guarantor,
 in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Secretary. Advertisement
 under the preceding sentence shall begin no later than fifteen days after
 the date of the designation made under subsection (a). If advertisement
 is not otherwise made in accordance with this subsection, the Secretary
 shall promptly and at the expense of the responsible party or the guarantor
 involved, advertise the designation and the procedures by which claims may
 be presented to the responsible party or guarantor. Advertisement under
 this subsection shall continue for a period of no less than thirty days.
SEC. 106. SUBROGATION.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Any person, including the Fund, who pays compensation
 pursuant to this Act to any claimant for costs, and interest shall be
 subrogated to all rights, claims, and causes of action that the claimant
 has under this Act.
 (b) ACTIONS ON BEHALF OF THE FUND- Upon request of the Secretary, the
 Attorney General may commence an action on behalf of the Fund to recover
 the amount of any compensation paid by the Fund to any claimant pursuant
 to this Act, and all expenses incurred by the Fund by reason of the claim,
 including interest (including prejudgment interest), administrative and
 adjudicative costs, and attorney's fees. Such an action may be commenced
 against any responsible party or (subject to section 107(e)) guarantor,
 or any other person who is liable, pursuant to any law, to the compensated
 claimant or to the Fund, for the costs for which the compensation was
 paid. Such an action shall be commenced against the responsible foreign
 government or other responsible party to recover any costs paid from the
 Fund as the result of the discharge or substantial threat of discharge,
 of oil from a foreign offshore unit.
 (c) ADMINISTRATIVE COST RECOVERY SETTLEMENT AUTHORITY- The Secretary may
 consider, compromise, and settle a claim for removal or resource assessment
 costs incurred by the United States Government or any claim acquired by the
 Fund through subrogation under this Act, if the claim has not been referred
 to the Department of Justice for further action. In the case of any incident
 where the total claims of the fund exceed $500,000 (excluding interest),
 any claims referred to in the preceding sentence may be compromised and
 settled only with the prior written approval of the Attorney General.
SEC. 107. FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
 (a) VESSELS- (1) REQUIREMENT- The responsible party for any vessesl over
 three hundred gross tons (except a non-self-propelled vessel that does
 not carry oil as cargo or fuel), using any port or place in the United
 States or the navigable waters or any offshore facility shall establish
 and maintain, in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Secretary,
 evidence of financial responsibility sufficient to meet the maximum amount
 of liability to which, in the case of a tanker, the responsible party
 could be subjected under section 102(c)(1)(A) of this Act, or to which,
 in the case of any other vessel, the responsible party could be subjected
 under section 102(c)(1)(B) of this Act, in a case where the responsible
 party would be entitled to limit liability under that section. If the
 responsible party owns or operates more than one vessel requiring evidence
 of financial responsibility, such evidence shall be established for all
 such vessels but in an amount sufficient only to meet the maximum liability
 applicable to the largest of such vessels.
 (2) WITHHOLDING CLEARANCE- The Secretary of the Treasury shall withhold
 or revoke the clearance required by section 4197 of the Revised Statutes
 of the United States of any vessel subject to this subsection that does
 not have the certification required under this subsection.
 (3) DENYING ENTRY TO OR DETAINING VESSELS- The Secretary may (A) deny entry
 to any offshore facility or any port or place in the United States, or to
 the navigable waters, or (B) detain at such a facility or port or place,
 any vessel that, upon request, does not produce the certification required
 under this subsection or the regulations issued under this subsection.
 (b) OFFSHORE FACILITIES- The responsible party with respect to an offshore
 facility shall establish and maintain evidence of financial responsibility
 sufficient to meet the maximum amount of liability to which the responsible
 party could be subjected under section 102 of this Act in a case where the
 responsible party would be entitled to limit liability under that section. In
 cases where a person is the responsible party for more than one facility
 subject to this subsection, evidence of financial responsibility need be
 established only in an amount sufficient to meet the maximum liability
 applicable to any one facility with the highest liability.
 (c) METHODS OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY- Financial responsibility under
 this section may be established by any one, or by any combination, of the
 following methods, which the Secretary determines to be acceptable: evidence
 of insurance, surety bond, guarantee, qualification as a self-insurer, or
 other evidence of financial responsibility acceptable to the Secretary. Any
 bond filed shall be issued by a bonding company authorized to do business
 in the United States. In promulgating requirements under this section,
 the Secretary is authorized to specify policy or other contractual terms,
 conditions, or defenses which are necessary, or which are unacceptable,
 in establishing such evidence of financial responsibility in order to
 effectuate the purposes of this Act.
 (d) CLAIMS AGAINST GUARANTOR- Any claim for which liability may be
 established under section 102 of this Act may be asserted directly
 against any guarantor providing evidence of financial responsibility for
 a responsible party, or a third party, liable under that section for costs
 and damages to which the claim pertains. In defending against such a claim,
 the guarantor may invoke all rights and defenses which would be available
 to the responsible party under section 102.
 (e) LIMITATION ON GUARANTOR'S LIABILITY- The total liability of any
 guarantor in a direct action suit brought under this section shall be
 limited to the aggregated amount of the monetary limits of the policy of
 insurance, guarantee, surety bond, or similar instrument obtained from the
 guarantor by the person subject to liability. Nothing in this subsection
 shall be construed, interpreted, or applied to diminish the liability of
 any person under this Act or any other law.
 (f) CIVIL PENALTY- (1) IN GENERAL- Any person who, after notice and an
 opportunity for a hearing, is found to have failed to comply with the
 requirements of this section or the regulations issued under this section,
 or with a denial or detention order issued under subsection (a)(3) of
 this section, shall be liable to the United States for a civil penalty,
 not to exceed $25,000 per day of each violation. The amount of the
 civil penalty shall be assessed by the Secretary by written notice. In
 determining the amount of the penalty, the Secretary shall take into
 account the nature, circumstances, extent, and gravity of the violation,
 the degree of culpability, any history of prior violation, ability to pay,
 and such other matters as justice may require. The Secretary may compromise,
 modify, or remit, with or without conditions, any civil penalty which is
 subject to imposition or which has been imposed under this paragraph. If
 any person fails to pay an assessed civil penalty after it has become final,
 the Secretary may refer the matter to the Attorney General for collection.
 (2) JUDICIAL RELIEF- In addition to, or in lieu of, assessing a penalty under
 paragraph (1) of this subsection, the Secretary may request the Attorney
 General to secure such relief as necessary to compel compliance with
 this section, including, but not limited to, a judicial order terminating
 operations. The district courts of the United States shall have jurisdiction
 to grant such relief as the public interest and the equities of the case
 may require.
 (3) REVIEW OF CIVIL PENALTY- Any person against whom a civil penalty is
 assessed under this section may obtain review thereof on the record in
 the appropriate court of the United States by filing a complaint in such
 court within thirty days from the date it becomes final under paragraph
 (1) of this subsection. The Secretary shall promptly file in such court
 a certified copy of the record upon which such violation was found and
 such penalty imposed. The findings and order of the Secretary shall be
 set aside by such court only if they are not found to be supported by
 substantial evidence, as provided in section 706(2) of title 5.
 (4) ACTION UPON FAILURE TO PAY ASSESSMENT- If any person fails to pay
 an assessment of a civil penalty after it has become final, or after the
 appropriate court has entered final judgment in favor of the Secretary,
 the Secretary shall refer the matter to the Attorney General of the United
 States, who shall recover the amount assessed in any appropriate district
 court of the United States. In such action, the validity and apropriateness
 of the final assessment shall not be subject to review.
 (g) CONTINUATION OF REGULATIONS- Any regulation respecting financial
 responsibility, which has been issued pursuant to any provision of law
 repealed or superseded by this Act, and which is in effect on the date
 immediately preceding the effective date of this Act, shall be deemed
 and construed to be a regulation issued pursuant to this section. Such a
 regulation shall remain in full force and effect unless and until superseded
 by new regulations issued under this section.
 (h) UNIFIED CERTIFICATE- The Secretary may issue one certificate of
 financial responsibility for purposes of this Act and the Comprehensive
 Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980.
SEC. 108. LITIGATION, JURISDICTION, AND VENUE.
 (a) REVIEW OF REGULATIONS- Review of any regulation promulgated under
 this Act may be had upon application by any interested person only in
 the circuit court of Appeals of the Untied States for the District of
 Columbia. Any such application shall be made within ninety days from the
 date of promulgation of such regulations.
 (b) JURISDICTION- Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, the
 United States district courts shall have original and exclusive jurisdiction
 over all causes of action arising under this Act (which shall be deemed
 to include actions under the International Convention on Civil Liability
 for Oil Pollution Damages, 1984, and the International Convention on the
 Establishment of an International Fund for Compensation for Oil Pollution
 Damage, 1984), without regard to the citizenship of the parties or the
 amount in controversy.
 (c) VENUE- Venue shall lie in any district in which the incident, injury,
 or damages occurred, or in which the defendant resides, may be found,
 has its principal office, or has appointed an agent for services of
 process. For the purposes of this section, the Fund and the International
 Fund, established under article 2 of the International Convention on the
 Establishment of an International Fund for Compensation for Oil Pollution
 Damage, 1984, shall reside in the District of Columbia.
 (d) SAVINGS PROVISION- Nothing in this Act shall affect any action commenced
 before the date of enactment of this Act.
 (e) PERIOD OF LIMITATIONS- (1) DAMAGES FOR ECONOMIC LOSS- Except as provided
 in paragraphs (3) and (4), an action may not be commenced for damages for
 economic loss under this Act, unless that action is commenced within three
 years after the date on which the injury resulting in the damages and its
 connection with the discharge in question were reasonably discoverable
 with the exercise of due care.
 (2) REMOVAL COSTS AND RESTORATION COSTS- Except as provided in paragraphs
 (3) and (4), an action may not be commenced--
 (A) for claims for the recovery of removal costs under this Act, unless
 the action is commenced within three years after the date of completion of
 all removal action, which was instituted and completed within a reasonable
 time following the incident.
 (B) for claims for the recovery of restoration costs under this Act, unless
 that action is commenced within three years after the date on which the
 injury necessitating such restoration costs and its connection with the
 discharge in question were reasonably discoverable with the exercise of
 due care or with respect to restoration costs if later and to the extent
 applicable, the date on which final regulations are promulgated under
 section 102(e)(2)(D) of this Act.
An action may be commenced under section 102 for recovery of removal or
restoration costs at any time after such costs have been incurred but prior
to the conclusion of the time periods set out under clauses (A) and (B)
of this paragraph.
 (3) ACTIONS FOR CONTRIBUTION- An action may not be commenced for contribution
 for any costs or damages unless that action is commenced within three
 years after--
 (A) the date of judgment in any action under this Act for recovery of such
 costs or damages, or
 (B) the date of entry of a judicially approved settlement with respect to
 such costs or damages.
 (4) SUBROGATION- An action based on rights subrogated pursuant to this Act
 by reason of payment of a claim may not be commenced under this Act unless
 that action is commenced within three years after the date of payment of
 such claim.
SEC. 109. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAW.
 (a) LIABILITY REGIMES- (1) Except as provided under section 302 of this
 Act, the cause of action established under section 111 of this title
 may be brought in the appropriate district court of the United States,
 as provided in section 108 of this title.
 (2) No action for costs or damages arising out of an accident may be brought
 in any State court. No action for cost or damages arising out of an incident
 may be brought in any Federal court except as provided in this Act.
 (b) NO PREEMPTION OF STATE FUNDS- Nothing in this title or section 9509
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 shall affect the authority of any
 State to establish or continue in effect, and to require any person to
 contribute to a fund, a purpose of which is to pay for costs or damages
 arising out of or directly resulting from an incident.
 (c) NO PREEMPTION OF CIVIL PENALTIES- Nothing in this Act or section 9509
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 shall affect the authority of the
 United States or any State or political subdivision thereof to impose,
 or to determine the amount of, any fine or penalty for any violation of
 law relating to an incident.
 (d) FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY- Except as provided under section 302 of this
 Act, nothing in this Act shall prevent a State from imposing or enforcing
 any requirement respecting financial responsibility.
 (e) SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY WAIVER LIMITATION- The only waiver of the sovereign
 immunity of the United States Government for oilspill liability is in
 accordance with this Act.
SEC. 110. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (b), this title shall
 take effect six months after the date of enactment. There shall be no
 recovery for natural resources damages under subsection (a) of section
 102 of this title where such damages and the discharge of oil from which
 such damages resulted have occurred wholly before the effective date. Any
 claims or causes of action in existence under current law as of the date
 of enactment shall be preserved.
 (b) PAYMENTS FROM FUND- Payments under section 103(a) may not be made
 before the effective date specified under section 208 of this Act.
SEC. 111. FEDERAL CAUSE OF ACTION BASED ON STATE OR OTHER FEDERAL LAW.
 In addition to the other causes of action established under this Act and
 except as precluded by the application of the conventions referred to in
 title III, a civil action for costs and damages may be brought in Federal
 court in accordance with the substantive law of the place where the injury
 occurred. Such law shall be incorporated into Federal law as the Federal
 rule of decision. The Act of March 3, 1851 (ch. 43, 95 Stat. 635 et seq.),
 as amended, shall not apply to any such action.
TITLE II--CONFORMING AMENDMENTS
SEC. 201. TRANS-ALASKA PIPELINE FUND.
 (a) Section 204(b) of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Authorization Act is
 amended--
 (1) in the first sentence, by inserting after `any area' the following:
 `in the State of Alaska';
 (2) in the first sentence, by inserting after `any activities' the following:
 `related to the trans-Alaska oil pipeline'; and
 (3) by inserting at the end of the subsection the following new sentence:
 `This subsection shall not apply to removal costs covered by the Oil
 Pollution Liability and Compensation Act of 1989.'.
 (b) Subsection (c) of section 204 of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Authorization
 Act is repealed. The repeal made by the preceding sentence shall not
 affect the applicability of that subsection to claims arising before the
 date of the enactment of this Act. The repeal of paragraphs (4), (6), and
 (8) of that subsection shall only become effective upon the payment by
 the Board of Trustees of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Liability Fund of all
 valid claims presented to such Fund.
 (c) Officers and trustees, both present and former, of the Trans-Alaska
 Pipeline Liability Fund shall not be subject to any liability incurred by
 that Fund or by the present and past officers and trustees of that Fund,
 other than liability for gross negligence or willful misconduct.
SEC. 202. INTERVENTION ON THE HIGH SEAS ACT.
 Section 17 of the Intervention on the High Seas Act is amended to read
 as follows:
 `SEC. 17. The Oilspill Liability Trust Fund shall be available to the
 Secretary for actions taken under sections 5 and 7 of this Act.'.
SEC. 203. FEDERAL WATER POLLUTION CONTROL ACT.
 Section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act is amended as follows:
 (1) Subparagraph (H) of paragraph (2) of subsection (c) is amended by
 striking out `from the Fund established under subsection (k) of this
 section for the reasonable costs incurred in such removal' and inserting
 in lieu thereof the following: `in the case of any discharges of oil from
 a vessel or facility, for the reasonable costs incurred in such removal
 from the Oilspill Liability Trust Fund'.
 (2) Subsection (d) is amended by striking out the last sentence.
 (3) (A) Subsections (f), (g), and (i) of section 311 of the Federal Water
 Pollution Control Act shall not apply with respect to any incident for
 which liability is established under section 102 of this Act.
 (B) Paragraphs (2) and (3) of subsection (f) are amended by striking out
 `under subsection (c) for the removal of such oil or substance by the
 United States Government' each place it appears and inserting in lieu
 thereof `under subsection (c) for the removal of such oil or substance
 by the United States Government and for payments made pursuant to section
 103(a)(1) of the Oil Pollution Liability and Compensation Act of 1989'.
 (4) Subsection (i) is amended by striking out `(1)' after `(i)' and striking
 out paragraphs (2) and (3).
 (5) Subsection (k) is repealed. Any amounts remaining in the revolving
 fund established under that subsection shall be deposited in the general
 fund of the Treasury. The Oilspill Liability Trust Fund shall assume all
 liability incurred by the revolving fund established under section 311(k)
 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
 (6) Subsection (1) is amended by striking out the second sentence.
 (7) Subsection (p) is repealed.
 (8) Section 311 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following
 new subsection:
 `(s) The Oilspill Liability Trust Fund shall be available to carry our
 subsections (c), (d), (i), and (l). Any amounts received by the United States
 under this section shall be deposited in the Oilspill Liability Trust Fund.'.
SEC. 204. DEEPWATER PORT ACT.
 The Deepwater Port Act of 1974 is amended as follows:
 (1) In section 4(c)(1) strike `section 18(1) of this Act;' and insert in
 lieu thereof `section 107 of the Oil Pollution Liability and Compensation
 Act of 1989,';
 (2) Subsections (b), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (l), (n), and
 paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (m) of section 18 are deleted.
 (3) Paragraph (3) of subsection (c) of section 18 is amended by striking
 `Deepwater Port Liability Fund established pursuant to subsection (f) of
 this section', and inserting in lieu thereof `Oilspill Liability Trust Fund'.
 (4) Subsections (c), (k), and (m) of section 18 are redesignated as
 subsections (b), (c), and (d) respectively, and paragraphs (3) and (4)
 of subsection (m) are redesignated as paragraphs (1) and (2), respectively.
 (5) Paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of section 19 is amended by striking
 the period at the end of the second sentence and inserting in lieu thereof
 `except that discharges from a deepwater port or from a vessel within a
 deepwater port safety zone which are subject to the civil penalty provisions
 of section 18(a)(2) of the Deepwater Port Act of 1974 shall not be subject
 to the penalty provisions of any other Federal law.'.
 (6) Any amounts remaining in the Deepwater Port Liability Fund, established
 under section 18(f) of the Deepwater Port Act of 1974, shall be deposited
 in the Fund established under this Act. The Oilspill Liability Trust Fund
 shall assume all liability incurred by the Deepwater Port Liability Fund.
SEC. 205. OUTER CONTINENTAL SHELF LANDS ACT AMENDMENTS.
 Title III of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act Amendment of 1978
 is hereby repealed. Any amounts remaining in the Offshore Oil Pollution
 Compensation Fund established under section 302 of that title shall be
 deposited in the Oilspill Liability Trust Fund. The Oilspill Liability
 Trust Fund shall assume all liability incurred by the Offshore Oil Pollution
 Compensation Fund.
SEC. 206. ENFORCEMENT OF FEDERAL WATER POLLUTION CONTROL ACT.
 (a) Section 308 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act is amended
 as follows:
 (1) Subsection (a) is amended by--
 (A) adding a new clause (4) providing--
 `(4) obtaining information regarding the identification, nature and quantity
 of materials on a vessel or at a facility,',
 (B) adding a new clause (5) providing--
 `(5) obtaining information regarding the source or nature or extent of a
 discharge or threatened discharge of oil or other pollutants from a vessel
 or a facility,',
 (C) adding a new clause (6) providing--
 `(6) obtaining information relating to the ability of a person to pay for
 or to perform cleanup or other remedial action,' and,
 (D) renumbering existing clause (4) as clause (7),
 (E) in clause (A), inserting `, vessel, or facility' after the words
 `point source', and deleting `Administrator' and inserting in lieu thereof
 `the President',
 (F) in clause (B)--
 (i) replacing subclause (i) with the following:
 `(i) shall have a right of entry to, upon, or through any premises, vessel,
 or facility in which an effluent source is located or from which there is
 a discharge or threat of discharge of oil or other pollutants into waters
 of the United States, or in which any records required to be maintained
 under clause (A) of this subsection are located,',
 (ii) in subclause (ii), striking the words `which the owner or operator
 of such source is required to sample under such clause' and insert in
 lieu thereof the words `or discharge or threatened discharges of oil or
 other pollutants,',
 (iii) adding new subclause (iii) providing `(iii) may at reasonable times
 enter any premises, vessel, or facility where oil or other pollutants are
 stored to determine the need for response action, to effectuate response
 action, or to obtain samples of oil or other pollutants.', and
 (iv) deleting the word `Administrator' each time it appears and inserting
 in lieu thereof the words `the President',
 (b) Section 309 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act is amended
 as follows:
 (1) Paragraph (4) of subsection (c) is amended by inserting the words
 `omits material information or' after the word `knowingly';
 (2) Add the following new paragraph (8) to subsection (c):
 (A) `In sentencing defendants under this section, the provisions of the
 Alternative Fines Act, section 3571 of title 18, United States Code,
 should be used whenever possible.'.
 (3) Subsection (d) is amended by--
 (A) designating the existing text as paragraph (1) and striking the word
 `311' therein,
 (B) adding the following new paragraphs (2), (3), and (4):
 `(2) Any person who violates paragraph (3) of subsection (b) of section 311
 of this Act, or any regulation issued under that paragraph, by the discharge
 (as defined in section 311 of this Act) of more than five barrels of oil,
 shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $25,000 per day for each
 violation or $1,000 per barrel of oil so discharged, whichever is greater.
 `(3) Any person who violates paragraph (3) of subsection (b) of section 311
 of this Act, or any regulation issued under that paragraph, by the discharge
 (as defined in section 311 of this Act) of any hazardous substance (as
 defined in section 311 of this Act) in such quantity as may be harmful,
 as determined pursuant to section 311 of this Act shall be subject to a
 civil penalty not to exceed $25,000 for each violation. Each discharge of
 such quantity as may be harmful, or additional fraction thereof, whether
 continuous or intermittent, shall be a separate violation.
 `(4) In determining the amount of a civil penalty under paragraphs (2)
 and (3) of this subsection, the court shall consider the seriousness of
 the violation or violations, the economic benefit (if any) resulting from
 the violation, any history of such violations, any good-faith efforts
 to comply with the applicable requirements, the economic impact of the
 penalty on the violator, and such other matters as justice may require.'.
 (4) Subsection (g) is amended by inserting before the word `318' the word
 `311,'; and inserting after the words `in a permit issued under section
 404 of this Act by a state' the phrase `or regulations issued by the
 Administrator pursuant to section 311'.
 (c) Section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act is amended
 as follows:
 (1) Subsection (b) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (5), deleting all after the first sentence and inserting the
 following in lieu thereof: `Any such person (A) in charge of a vessel from
 which oil or a hazardous substance is discharged in violation of paragraph
 (3)(i) of this subsection, or (B) in charge of a vessel from which oil
 or a hazardous substance is discharged in violation of paragraph (3)(ii)
 of this subsection and who is otherwise subject to the jurisdiction of the
 United States at the time of the discharge, or (C) in charge of an onshore
 facility or an offshore facility, who fails to notify immediately such agency
 of such discharge shall, upon conviction, be fined in accordance with the
 applicable provisions of title 18 or imprisoned for not more than three
 years (or not more than five years in the case of a second or subsequent
 conviction), or both. Notification received pursuant to this paragraph or
 information that could not have been obtained but for the exploitation of
 such notification shall not be used against any natural person who gives
 such notification in any criminal case, except a prosecution for perjury
 or for giving a false statement.';
 (B) in subparagraph (A) of paragraph (6), striking the words `$5,000 for
 each offense' in each of the first two sentences thereof, and inserting
 in lieu thereof in both instances the words `$25,000 for each offense,
 each day such discharge continues being a separate offense,';
 (C) in subparagraph (B) of paragraph (6), by--
 (i) deleting the second sentence, and inserting in lieu thereof the
 following: `Where the United States can show that such discharge was the
 result of willful negligence or willful misconduct within the privity and
 knowledge of the owner, operator, or person in charge, such penalty shall
 be no less than $100,000.';
 (ii) inserting the following sentence at the end of that subparagraph:
 `Civil penalties shall not be assessed under both this clause and section
 309(d) for the same discharge.'; and
 (iii) deleting subparagraph (E) of paragraph (6).
 (2) Subsection (e) is replaced with the following:
 `(e) INJUNCTIVE RELIEF; ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS; JUDICIAL REVIEW- (1)
 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF- In addition to any action taken by a State or local
 government, when the President determines that there may be an imminent and
 substantial endangerment to the public health or welfare or the environment
 of the United States, including, but not limited to, fish, shellfish,
 and wildlife and public and private property, oceans, navigable waters,
 contiguous zone, shorelines, estuaries, wetlands, and beaches because of
 a discharge or threat of a discharge of oil or a hazardous substance in
 violation of paragraph (3) of subsection (b) of this section from a vessel
 or facility, the President may require the Attorney General to secure
 such relief from any person, including but not limited to the owner or
 operator of such vessel or facility, as may be necessary to abate such
 endangerment. The district court of the United States for the district in
 which the threat occurs shall have jurisdiction to grant such relief as
 the public interest requires as may be necessary to abate the endangerment.
 `(2) ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS- In the circumstances described in paragraph (1),
 the President may also, after notice to the affected State, take other action
 under this section, including but not limited to, issuing such orders as may
 be necessary to protect public health and welfare and the environment. Where
 the recipient of such an order fails, without sufficient cause to obey
 such order, the President may request the Attorney General to bring an
 action in the appropriate district court of the United States to enforce
 such order, to assess a civil penalty of not more than $25,000 per day of
 each violation of the order, and to assess three times the costs or damages
 incurred as a result of the failure or refusal to comply with the order.
 `(3) JUDICIAL REVIEW- A determination of the President, under paragraph
 (1) as to the nature and scope of relief sought and an order issued by the
 President under paragraph (2) shall not be subject to judicial review except
 in a proceeding under this subsection to secure relief or to enforce such
 order. Judicial review of such orders or determinations shall be limited
 to the agency administrative record. Otherwise applicable principles of
 administrative law shall govern whether supplemental materials may be
 considered by the court. The reviewing court shall uphold the order or
 determination unless the respondent can demonstrate, on the administrative
 record, that the order or determination was arbitrary and capricious or
 otherwise not in accordance with law.'.
 (3) Subsection (n) is amended by--
 (A) designating the existing text as paragraph (1), and
 (B) adding a new paragraph (2) providing:
 `(2) All decisions taken by the President under paragraph (1) of subsection
 (c) and subsection (d) of this section are operational discretionary
 decisions of the President not subject to judicial review. The adequacy of
 removal actions or actions to mitigate damage to the environment selected
 by the President shall be subject to judicial review only in a proceeding
 by the Government to recover the costs of such actions under subsection (f)
 of this section or to obtain injunctive relief or to enforce administrative
 orders under subsection (e) of this section. In an action to recover the
 costs of removal or mitigation actions, judicial review of the adequacy
 of removal actions shall be limited to the agency's administrative record
 relating to such actions. Otherwise applicable principles of administrative
 law shall govern whether any supplemental materials may be considered
 by the court. The reviewing court shall uphold the action unless the
 respondent can demonstrate, on the administrative record, that the action
 was arbitrary and capricious or otherwise not in accordance with law.'.
 (d) Section 502 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act is amended by
 the addition of two new paragraphs (20) and (21) providing:
 `(20) The term `oil' means oil of any kind or in any form, including,
 but not limited to, petroleum, fuel oil, sludge, oil refuse, and oil mixed
 with wastes other than dredged spoil.
 `(21) the term `barrel' means forty-two United States gallons at sixty
 degrees Fahrenheit.'.
 (e) Section 509 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act is amended in
 paragraph (1) of subsection (a) by striking the words `obtaining information
 under section 305 of this Act, or carrying out section 507(e) of this Act'
 and inserting in lieu thereof the words `carrying out this Act'.
SEC. 207. TITLE 26, UNITED STATES CODE.
 (a) Subsection (f) of section 4611 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986
 is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1) and subparagraph (B) of paragraph (3), by striking
 the words `January 1, 1992', whenever they appear, and inserting in lieu
 thereof the words `July 1, 1994'.
 (2) in subparagraph (A) of paragraph (3) by striking the words `December
 31, 1991' and inserting in lieu thereof the words `June 30, 1994'.
 (3) by striking paragraph (2) and inserting in lieu thereof the following:
 `(2) COMMENCEMENT DATE- For purposes of this subsection, the term
 `commencement date' means the first day of the first calendar month
 beginning more than thirty days after the passage of the Comprehensive
 Oil Pollution Liability and Compensation Act of 1989.'.
 (b) subsection (c) of section 9509 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986
 is amended by striking the text of paragraphs (1) and (2) and inserting
 in lieu thereof the following:
 `(1) GENERAL EXPENDITURE PURPOSES- Amounts in the Oilspill Liability
 Trust Fund shall be available, as provided in appropriations Acts, only
 for purposes of making expenditures authorized under the Comprehensive
 Oil Production Liability and Compensation Act of 1989.
 `(2) Limitations on expenditures-
 `(A) $500,000,000 PER INCIDENT- The maximum amount which may be paid from
 the Oilspill Liability Trust Fund with respect to any single incident,
 in combination with payment, if any, under the International Convention
 on the Establishment of an International Fund for Compensation for Oil
 Pollution Damage, 1984, shall be $500,000,000. Notwithstanding any other
 provision of law, the President is authorized to waive the limit imposed
 by this subparagraph and to prescribe a higher limit upon a determination
 that it is necessary and in the best interests of the country.
 `(B) $30,000,000 MINIMUM BALANCE- Except in the case of removal costs as
 defined in the Comprehensive Oil Pollution Liability and Compensation Act
 of 1989, a payment may be made from such Fund only if the amount in such
 Fund after such payment will not be less than $30,000,000.'.
SEC. 208. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 Sections 201, 202, 203, 204, and 205 shall be effective on the later of
 (1) the commencement date (as that term is defined in section 4611(f)(2)
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986), or (2) the effective date of the
 first Appropriation Act enacted for the purposes of section 9509 (c)(1)
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
TITLE III--IMPLEMENTATION OF INTERNATIONAL CONVENTIONS
SEC. 301. DEFINITIONS.
 For the purposes of this title--
 (1) the term `Civil Liability Convention' means the International Convention
 on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage, 1984;
 (2) the terms `ship', `owner', `oil', `pollution damage', and `incident'
 shall have the meanings provided in article I of the Civil Liability
 Convention;
 (3) the term `financial responsibility' has the same meaning as `financial
 security' under the Civil Liability Convention;
 (4) the term `Fund Convention' means the International Convention on the
 Establishment of an International Fund for Compensation for Oil Pollution
 Damage, 1984; and
 (5) the term `International Fund' means the International Oil Pollution
 Compensation Fund, established under article 2 of the Fund Convention.
SEC. 302. APPLICABILITY OF CONVENTIONS.
 During any period in which the Civil Liability Convention and the Fund
 Convention are in force with respect to the United States, liability and
 financial responsibility relating to pollution damage arising from an
 incident involving a ship shall be determined in accordance with the Civil
 Liability Convention and Fund Convention. During such a period, no claim
 for such pollution damage may be made in contravention of those conventions
 under any law. Furthermore, during such a period, except as provided under
 section 307, no requirement concerning financial responsibility respecting
 pollution damage may be imposed or enforced. Nothing in this title shall
 constitute a ratification of either the Civil Liability Convention or the
 Fund Convention.
SEC. 303. RECOGNITION OF INTERNATIONAL FUND.
 The International Fund is recognized under the laws of the United States
 as a legal person, and shall have the capacity to acquire and dispose
 of real and personal property, and to institute and be party to legal
 proceedings. The Director of the International Fund is recognized as the
 legal representative of the International Fund. The Director shall be deemed
 to have appointed irrevocably the Secretary of State as the International
 Fund's agent for the service of process in any legal proceedings involving
 the International Fund within the United States. The International Fund
 and its assets shall be exempt from all direct taxation and payment of
 any customs duties in the United States.
SEC. 304. ACTION IN UNITED STATES COURTS.
 (a) SERVICE OF PROCESS ON FUND- In any action brought in a court in the
 United States against the owner of a ship or its guarantor under the Civil
 Liability Convention, the plaintiff or defendant, as the case may be,
 shall serve a copy of the complaint and any subsequent pleading therein
 upon the International Fund at the same time the complaint or other pleading
 is served upon the opposing parties.
 (b) INTERVENTION- The International Fund may intervene as a party as a
 matter of right in any action brought in a court in the United States against
 the owner of a ship or its guarantor under the Civil Liability Convention.
SEC. 305. CONTRIBUTION TO INTERNATIONAL FUND.
 (a) PAYMENTS TO BE MADE FROM OILSPILL LIABILITY TRUST FUND- The amount of
 any contribution to the International Fund which is required to be made
 under article 10 of the Fund Convention by any person with respect to oil
 received in any port, terminal installation, or other installation located
 in the United States shall be paid to the International Fund from the
 Oilspill Liability Trust Fund established by section 9509 of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986.
 (b) INFORMATION- The Secretary may, by regulation, require persons who are
 required to make contributions with respect to oil received in any port,
 terminal, installation, or other installations in the United States under
 article 10 of the Fund Convention to provide all information relating to
 that oil as may be necessary to carry out subsection (a) of this section,
 articles 10, 12, 13, 14, and 15 of the Fund Convention, and article 29 of the
 Protocol of 1984 to Amend the International Convention on the Establishment
 of an International Fund for Compensation for Oil Pollution Damage, 1971.
SEC. 306. RECOGNITION OF FOREIGN JUDGMENTS.
 Any final judgment of a court of any country which is a party to the
 Civil Liability Convention or to the Fund Convention in an action for
 compensation under either convention shall be recognized by any court of
 the United States having jurisdiction under this Act, when that judgment
 has become enforceable in that country and is no longer subject to ordinary
 form of review, except where--
 (1) the judgment was obtained by fraud, or
 (2) the defendant was not given reasonable notice and a fair opportunity
 to present its case.
SEC. 307. FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
 (a) UNITED STATES DOCUMENTED SHIPS- The owner of each ship which is
 documented under the laws of the United States which is subject to the
 Civil Liability Convention shall establish and maintain in accordance with
 regulations promulgated by the Secretary evidence of financial responsibility
 as required in article VII of the Civil Liability Convention.
 (b) OTHER SHIPS- The owner of each ship (other than a ship to which
 subsection (a) applies or a ship which is a public vessel), which is subject
 to the Civil Liability Convention and which enters or leaves a port or
 terminal in the United States or uses an Outer Continental Shelf facility
 or an offshore facility that is or was licensed under the Deepwater Port
 Act of 1974, shall establish and maintain, in accordance with regulations
 promulgated by the Secretary, evidence of financial responsibility as
 required in article VII of the Civil Liability Convention. Any ship which
 has on board a valid certificate issued in accordance with article VII
 of the Civil Liability Convention shall be considered as having met the
 requirements of this subsection. Any ship carrying only oil as cargo, fuel,
 or residue, which has on board a valid certificate issued in accordance
 with article VII of the Civil Liability Convention shall be considered as
 having met the requirements of section 104 of this Act.
 (c) AUTHORITY OF SECRETARY TO ISSUE- The Secretary is authorized to issue
 any certificate of financial responsibility which the United States may
 issue under the Civil Liability Convention.
 (d) WITHHOLDING CLEARANCE- The Secretary of the Treasury shall withhold or
 revoke the clearance required by section 4197 of the Revised Statutes of the
 United States of any ship which does not have a certificate demonstrating
 compliance with this section.
 (e) DENYING ENTRY AND DETAINING VESSELS- The Secretary of the department
 in which the Coast Guard is operating may (1) deny entry to any facility or
 to any port or place in the United States, or (2) detain at the facility or
 port or place in the United States, any ship subject to this section which,
 upon request, does not produce the certificate demonstrating compliance
 with this section or regulations issued hereunder.
 (f) CIVIL PENALTY- Any person who, after notice and an opportunity for a
 hearing, is found to have violated this section, any regulation issued
 under this section, section 305(b), or section 308, or any denial or
 detention order issued under subsection (e) of this section shall be liable
 to the United States for a civil penalty, not to exceed $25,000 per day of
 violation. The amount of the civil penalty shall be assessed by the Secretary
 in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 107 of this Act.
 (g) WAIVER OF SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY- The United States waives all defenses
 based on its status as a sovereign State with respect to any controversy
 arising under the Civil Liability Convention or the Fund Convention relating
 to any ship owned by the United States and used for commercial purposes.
SEC. 308. REGULATIONS.
 The Secretary may prescribe the necessary regulations to carry out this
 Act and all obligations of the United States under the Civil Liability
 Convention and the Fund Convention.