HR 16 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 16
To provide a program of national health insurance, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
January 3, 1989
Mr. DINGELL introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Energy and Commerce
A BILL
To provide a program of national health insurance, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That this Act, with the following
 table of contents, may be cited as the `National Health Insurance Act'.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Secs. 2-5. Declaration of purpose.
TITLE I--BENEFITS AND ELIGIBILITY
Sec.101.Classes of personal health services.
Sec.102.Availability of benefits.
Sec.103.How benefits obtained; free choice by patient.
Sec.104.Eligibility for benefits.
Sec.105.Provision of benefits for noninsured needy and other individuals.
TITLE II--PARTICIPATION OF PHYSICIANS, DENTISTS, NURSES, HOSPITALS, AND OTHERS
Sec.201.Physicians and dentists; specialists.
Sec.202.Nurses.
Sec.203.Hospitals.
Sec.204.Auxiliary services.
Sec.205.Agreements with individual practitioners, hospitals, and others.
Sec.206.Agreements with voluntary health insurance and other organizations.
Sec.207.Provisions common to all agreements.
Sec.208.Methods of payments for services.
Sec.209.Amount of payments for services.
Sec.210.Professional rights and responsibilities.
TITLE III--LOCAL ADMINISTRATION
Sec.301.Decentralization of administration.
Sec.302.Local administrative committee or officer.
Sec.303.Local area committees.
Sec.304.Local professional committees.
Sec.305.Methods of administration.
TITLE IV--STATE ADMINISTRATION
Sec.401.Declaration of policy.
Sec.402.State plan of operations.
Title V--National Health Insurance Board; National Advisory Medical Policy
Council; General Administrative Provisions
Sec.501.National Health Insurance Board.
Sec.502.Advisory Council.
Sec.503.Studies, recommendations, and reports.
Sec.504.Nondisclosure of information.
Sec.505.Prohibition against discrimination.
TITLE VI--ELIGIBILITY DETERMINATIONS, COMPLAINTS, HEARINGS, AND JUDICIAL REVIEW
Sec.601.Determinations as to eligibility for benefits.
Sec.602.Complaints of eligible individuals and of persons furnishing benefits.
TITLE VII--APPLICATION OF ACT TO INDIVIDUALS COVERED UNDER MEDICARE PROGRAM
Sec.701.Eligibility; benefits available.
Sec.702.Study and report.
TITLE VIII--FISCAL PROVISIONS
Sec.801.Personal health services account.
Sec.802.Allotment of funds.
Sec.803.Grants-in-aid for training and education.
TITLE IX--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Sec.901.Definitions.
Sec.902.Effective date.
findings and declaration of purpose
 SEC. 2. (a) The Congress finds that--
 (1) the health of the Nation's people is the foundation of our Nation's
 strength, productivity, and wealth;
 (2) the assurance of adequate medical care to all of our people is essential
 to the general welfare and to the Nation's security;
 (3) since the tremendous advances in medical science in recent years have
 necessarily meant great advances in the cost of health services, our
 archaic system of paying for medical care--based on public and private
 charity for the poor, on unpredictable and often unbearable costs to
 the otherwise self-supporting, and on disproportionate charges for the
 well-to-do--has resulted in the following conditions:
 (A) the inability of the vast majority of our people to meet the shattering
 cost of serious or chronic illness;
 (B) the inability of most of our people to benefit from modern preventive
 medicine; and
 (C) wholly inadequate provision for the health needs of our farm families
 and agricultural workers;
 (4) the conditions described in the preceding paragraph cannot effectively
 be remedied under the present system of payment for medical care, or under
 any voluntary insurance system; and
 (5) a medical dole as an answer to this problem is repugnant to the American
 people and would certainly result in a system of state medicine, paid for
 from tax funds and rendered by regimented doctors.
 (b) The Congress declares the purposes of this Act to be to provide a sound
 economic foundation for our free system of medicine and to correct the
 maldistribution of health personnel and facilities by establishing a system
 of prepaid personal health insurance on the principle of social insurance.
 SEC. 3. In establishing a system of national health insurance, it is the
 policy of this Act that those persons and their dependents who are insured
 under the provisions of the Act shall pay for its benefits in proportion
 to their incomes, and shall, therefore, receive its benefits as a right
 and not as charity; that they shall be assured full freedom to choose
 their physicians and to change their choice as they may desire; that
 physicians and other professions furnishing services in accordance with
 the provisions of this Act shall be assured full freedom in the practice
 of their professions, including the right to accept or reject patients
 except as this right may be restricted by their own professional ethics
 or by the laws of the several States; and that the administration of this
 Act shall be based upon the American principle of decentralization.
 SEC. 4. In carrying out these policies, it is the intention of Congress
 that the major administrative responsibilities be placed in the hands of
 local bodies representing both those who pay for and receive services
 and those who render services, and operating within the framework of
 plans made by the several States, and approved by the Federal agency;
 that the Personal Health Services Account created by this Act shall be
 allotted equitably among the several States and by the States to their
 local areas; that voluntary as well as governmental organizations shall
 be recognized and utilized; and that all eligible individuals and their
 dependents as specified in this Act shall be entitled to its benefits
 without discrimination because of race, color, or creed.
 SEC. 5. The Congress further declares that it is the policy of the United
 States to take such steps and to utilize such of its resources as are
 necessary toward making adequate health services available to all our
 people regardless of residence, race, creed, color, or economic status.
TITLE I--BENEFITS AND ELIGIBILITY
classes of personal health services
 SEC. 101. (a) The personal health services to be made available as
 benefits to eligible individuals as provided in this title are medical
 services, dental services, podiatric services, home-nursing services,
 hospital services, and auxiliary services. Each class of services shall be
 provided by persons (including individuals, partnerships, corporations,
 associations, consumer cooperatives, and other organizations) who are
 authorized by applicable State law, and who are qualified under title II
 of this Act, to do so.
 (b) Medical services consist of (1) general medical services such as
 can be rendered by a physician engaged in the general or family practice
 of medicine, including preventive, diagnostic, and therapeutic care and
 periodic medical examinations; and (2) specialist services rendered by a
 physician who is a specialist in the class of services rendered, as defined
 in section 201 of this Act. Such services may be rendered at the office,
 home, hospital, or elsewhere, as necessary.
 (c) Dental services consist of (1) general dental services rendered by a
 dentist engaged in the general practice of dentistry, including preventive,
 diagnostic, and therapeutic care, and periodic dental examinations; and (2)
 specialist services rendered by a dentist who is a specialist in the class
 of services rendered, as defined in section 201 of this Act. Such services
 may be rendered at the office, home, hospital, or elsewhere, as necessary.
 (d) Podiatric services consist of those professional services of a podiatrist
 who is legally authorized to perform such services in the State in which
 he practices.
 (e) Home-nursing services consist of nursing care of the sick rendered in
 the home by a registered professional nurse or a qualified practical nurse.
 (f) Hospital services consist of hospitalization, including necessary nursing
 services, and such physician, laboratory, ambulance, and other services
 in connection with hospitalization as the National Health Insurance Board
 (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the `Board'), after consultation
 with the National Advisory Medical Policy Council (hereinafter in this
 Act referred to as the `Advisory Council'), by regulation designates
 as essential to good hospital care, for a maximum of sixty days in any
 benefit year; but hospital services shall not include hospitalization in
 a mental or nervous disease or tuberculosis hospital or institution, or
 hospitalization for any day more than thirty days following the diagnosis
 of tuberculosis or a psychosis. Whenever the Board, after consultation
 with the Advisory Council, finds that moneys in the account (established
 by section 701) are adequate and that facilities are available, it may by
 regulation increase the maximum days of hospitalization in any benefit year.
 (g) Auxiliary services consist of such chemical, bacteriological,
 pathological, diagnostic X-ray and related laboratory services; X-ray,
 radium, and related therapy; physiotherapy; services of optometrists;
 and prescribed drugs which are unusually expensive, special appliances,
 and eyeglasses; as the Board, after consultation with the Advisory Council,
 by regulation designates as auxiliary services on the basis of its finding
 that their provision under this Act is practicable and is essential to
 good health care.
availability of benefits
 SEC. 102. (a) Medical services, hospital services, and, except as otherwise
 provided in subsection (b) of this section, all other personal health
 services specified in section 101 shall be made available (subject to section
 701) as benefits to eligible individuals in all health-service areas within
 the United States as rapidly and as completely as possible having regard
 for the availability of the professional and technical personnel and the
 hospital and other facilities needed to provide such services. To this
 end the resources and needs of each State shall be surveyed and a program
 developed in each State to assure the maximum participation and use of health
 personnel and facilities in the provision of benefits, and to encourage
 improvement in the number and distribution of such personnel and facilities
 throughout the State. Additional surveys shall be undertaken as required,
 and the program in the State from time to time modified on the basis thereof.
 (b) If the Board, after consultation with the Advisory Council, finds that
 the personnel or facilities or funds that are or can be made available
 are inadequate to insure the provision of all services included as dental,
 home-nursing, or auxiliary services under section 101 of this Act, it may by
 regulation limit for a specified period the services which may be provided as
 benefits, or modify the extent to which, or the circumstances under which,
 they will be provided to eligible individuals. Any such restriction or
 limitation shall be reduced or withdrawn as rapidly as may be practicable;
 and, in the case of dental services, priority in the reduction or withdrawal
 of any such restriction or limitation shall be given to children.
 (c) The Board shall have the duty of studying and making recommendations as
 to needed services and facilities for the care of the chronic sick afflicted
 with physical ailments, and for the care of individuals afflicted with
 mental or nervous diseases, and as to needed provisions for the prevention
 of chronic physical diseases and of mental or nervous diseases; and of
 making reports from time to time, with recommendations as to legislation,
 but the first such report shall be made not later than two years after
 benefits under this Act first become available.
how benefits obtained: free choice by patient
 SEC. 103. Every individual eligible for personal health services available
 under this Act may freely select the physician, dentist, podiatrist,
 nurse, medical group, hospital, or other person of his choice to render
 such services, and may change such selection if the practitioner, medical
 group, hospital, or other person has agreed under title II of this
 Act to furnish the class of services required and consents to furnish
 such services to the individual. General medical, dental, and podiatric
 services may be obtained by request made by the individual directly to
 the practitioner of the individual's choice. Specialist, home-nursing,
 hospital, and auxiliary services shall be obtained from the specialist,
 nurse, hospital, or other person of the individual's choice, whenever
 the practitioner from whom he is receiving medical or dental services as
 benefits under this Act refers him for specialist, home-nursing, hospital,
 or auxiliary services upon determining that such services are required in
 the proper care of his particular case; or whenever, upon request of the
 individual, an administrative medical officer, upon a like determination,
 refers him for such services. The Board, by regulation, shall dispense with
 the necessity of referral in cases of emergency, and may dispense with the
 necessity of referral under specified circumstances or as respects specified
 classes of services, or both, if it finds, after consultation with the
 Advisory Council, that such action will be conducive to the provision of a
 more adequate amount and quality of health care and will not unreasonably
 increase the expenditures from the account for such services.
eligibility for benefits
 SEC. 104. (a) Subject to section 701, every individual shall be eligible
 for benefits under this Act throughout any benefit year if--
 (1) he has received (or, in the case of income from self-employment,
 has accrued)--
 (A) not less than $150 in wages during the first four of the last six
 calendar quarters preceding the beginning of the benefit year; or
 (B) not less than $50 in wages in each of six calendar quarters during the
 first twelve of the last fourteen calendar quarters preceding the beginning
 of the benefit year (not counting as one of such fourteen calendar quarters
 any quarter in any part of which the individual was under a total disability
 which continued for six months or more);
 (2) he is entitled, for the first month in the benefit year, to a benefit
 under title II of the Social Security Act or to an annuity under subchapter
 III (relating to civil service retirement) of chapter 83 of title 5,
 United States Code; or
 (3) he is on the first day of the benefit year a dependent of an individual
 who is eligible under paragraph (1) or paragraph (2).
 (b) Subject to section 701, every individual, not eligible therefor under
 subsection (a), shall be eligible for benefits under this Act during the
 remainder of a benefit year, beginning with--
 (1) the first day of any calendar quarter in such benefit year, if he has
 received (or, in the case of income from self-employment, has accrued)
 not less than $150 in wages during the first four of the last six calendar
 quarters preceding the beginning of such calendar quarter;
 (2) the first day of the first month in such benefit year for which he is
 entitled to a benefit or annuity referred to in subsection (a)(2); or
 (3) the first day in such benefit year on which he is or becomes a dependent
 of an individual who is eligible for benefits under subsection (a) (1) or
 (2) under paragraph (1) or (2) of this subsection.
 (c) No individual shall be deemed eligible for any personal health
 services as a benefit under this Act which are required by reason of any
 injury, disease, or disability on account of which any medical, dental,
 home-nursing, hospital, or auxiliary service is being received, or upon
 application therefor would be received, under a workmen's compensation
 law of the United States or of any State, unless equitable reimbursements
 to the account for the provision of such services as benefits have been
 made or assured under section 105 of this Act. In any case in which an
 individual receives any personal health service as a benefit under this
 Act with respect to any such injury, disease, or disability, for which
 no reimbursement to the account has been made or assured, the United
 States shall to the extent permitted by State law be subrogated to all
 rights of such individual, or of the person who furnished such service,
 to be paid or reimbursed, pursuant to such workmen's compensation law,
 for the cost of furnishing such service.
provision of benefits for noninsured needy and other individuals
 SEC. 105. (a) Subject to section 701, any or all benefits provided under this
 Act to individuals eligible for such benefits may be furnished to individuals
 (including the needy) not otherwise eligible therefor, for any period for
 which equitable reimbursements to the account on behalf of such needy or
 other individuals have been made, or for which reasonable assurance of such
 reimbursements have been given, by public agencies of the United States,
 the several States, or any of them or of their political subdivisions, such
 reimbursements to be in accordance with agreements and working arrangements
 negotiated with such public agencies. Services furnished to such needy or
 other individuals as benefits shall be of the same quality, be furnished
 by the same methods, and be paid for through the same arrangements, as
 services furnished to individuals eligible for benefits under this Act.
 (b) Federal grants to States under title XIX, and part A of title IV, of
 the Social Security Act, and Federal grants to States for aid or assistance
 under other provisions of such Act, shall be available to the States for
 provision of personal-health services for noninsured needy individuals in
 accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section.
TITLE II--PARTICIPATION OF PHYSICIANS, DENTISTS, NURSES, HOSPITALS, AND OTHERS
physicians and dentists; specialists
 SEC. 201. Any individual who is a physician, dentist, or podiatrist legally
 authorized in a State to render any services included as general medical,
 dental, or podiatric services shall be deemed qualified to render such
 services in that State as benefits under this Act. Any such individual who
 is found to possess skill and experience of a degree and kind sufficient
 to meet standards established for a class of specialist services shall
 be deemed qualified to receive compensation for specialist services of
 such class as benefits under this Act. The Board, after consultation with
 the Advisory Council, shall establish standards as to the special skills
 and experience required to qualify an individual to render each such
 class of specialist services as benefits under this Act, and to receive
 compensation for such specialist services. In establishing such standards
 and in determining whether individuals qualify thereunder, standards and
 certifications developed by professional agencies shall be utilized as
 far as is consistent with the purposes of this Act, and regard shall be
 had for the varying needs and the available resources in professional
 personnel of the States and of local health-service areas.
nurses
 SEC. 202. Any individual shall be deemed qualified to render home-nursing
 services in a State as benefits under this title if such individual is (a)
 a professional nurse registered in such State, or (b) a practical nurse (1)
 who is qualified as such under State standards or requirements, or, in the
 absence of State standards or requirements, is found to be qualified under
 standards established by the Board after consultation with the Advisory
 Council and with nursing agencies, and (2) who furnishes nursing care under
 the direction or supervision of the State health agency, the health agency
 of a political subdivision of the State, or an organization supplying and
 supervising the services of registered professional nurses in the State.
hospitals
 SEC. 203. Any hospital or other institution shall be deemed qualified
 to furnish all or particular classes of hospital services as benefits
 under this Act if it is qualified to furnish such services under State
 standards or requirements for the maintenance and operation of hospitals
 which apply to the class or classes of services to be furnished, or if,
 in the absence of such State standards or requirements, it is found to
 afford professional services, personnel, and equipment adequate to promote
 the health and safety of individuals requiring the class or classes of
 hospital services to be furnished, according to standards which the Board
 shall establish after consultation with the Advisory Council.
auxiliary services
 SEC. 204. Any person (as defined in section 901(1)) who is qualified
 under State standards or requirements to furnish a class of services
 included as auxiliary services, or, in the absence of State standards or
 requirements, is found to be qualified to furnish a class of such services
 under standards established for such class by the Board after consultation
 with the Advisory Council, shall be deemed qualified to furnish such class
 of auxiliary services in that State as benefits under this Act.
agreements with individual practitioners, hospitals, and others
 SEC. 205. Any individual (or, in the case of hospital or auxiliary services,
 any person) qualified under this title to furnish any class or classes of
 personal health services as benefits may enter into an agreement with the
 State agency which in accordance with title IV has assumed responsibility for
 the administration in the State of benefits under this Act (hereinafter in
 this Act referred to as the `State agency'), to furnish such class or classes
 of services as benefits to individuals eligible therefor under this Act.
agreements with voluntary health insurance and other organizations
 SEC. 206. (a) In the provision of personal health services, it shall be the
 policy to utilize individuals or organizations qualified under this title
 to render such services, including (1) any organized group of individuals,
 (2) any partnership, association, or consumer cooperative, (3) any hospital
 or any hospital and its staff, or (4) any organization operating a voluntary
 health-service insurance plan or other voluntary health-service plan.
 (b) The State agency is authorized to enter into an agreement with any
 organization referred to in subsection (a) for the provision of personal
 health services under this Act. Any such organization, whether or not it
 enters into an agreement with the State agency on its own behalf, shall be
 permitted to act as agent for individuals or other persons in negotiating
 or in carrying out agreements with the State agency for rendering personal
 health services under this Act.
 (c) Any agreement under this section shall provide that each class of
 personal health services will be furnished only by individuals (or, in the
 case of hospital or auxiliary benefits, by persons, as defined in section
 901(1)) who are qualified under this title to render such class of services
 and each of whom has agreed or has authorized an agreement to be made on
 his behalf with the State agency that he will furnish such services in
 accordance with this Act and with regulations prescribed thereunder. Each
 such individual or person shall be responsible, both to the State agency
 and (in accordance with applicable State law) to individuals eligible for
 personal health services as benefits, for carrying out such agreement made
 by him or on his behalf.
provisions common to all agreements
 SEC. 207. (a) Each agreement made under this title shall specify the class
 or classes of services to be furnished or provided pursuant to its terms,
 shall contain an undertaking to comply with this Act and with regulations
 prescribed thereunder, shall be made upon terms and conditions consistent
 with the efficient and economical administration of this Act, and shall
 continue in force for such period and be terminable upon such notice as
 may be agreed upon.
 (b) No agreement under section 206, and no designation of an agent, shall
 for more than one year preclude any individual or person qualified to
 furnish personal health services from exercising such rights as he would
 otherwise have under this title (1) to negotiate and enter into an agreement
 directly with the State agency, or (2) to designate another agent for such
 negotiation, or (3) to participate in another agreement under section 206.
 (c) No agreement made under this title shall confer upon any individual or
 other person, or any group or other organization, the right of furnishing
 or providing personal health services as benefits, to the exclusion in
 whole or in part of other individuals, persons, groups, or organizations
 qualified to furnish or provide such services.
 (d) If the State agency after investigation finds that an individual or
 other person under agreement to furnish or provide personal health services
 as benefits is no longer qualified to furnish or provide such services,
 or has committed a substantial breach of the agreement, it shall notify
 such person of its findings, together with the reasons therefor, and in
 the absence of a request for a hearing by such person under title VI, or
 in the event of a final decision sustaining its findings after any hearing
 and further review provided under title VI, may terminate the agreement
 and withdraw the person's name from the list published pursuant to title
 III. After an agreement has been so terminated, no new agreement shall be
 entered into with such person under this Act unless and until such person
 gives reasonable assurances to the State agency of his or its ability and
 willingness to discharge all obligations and responsibilities under a new
 agreement satisfactorily in accordance with its provisions.
methods of payments for services
 SEC. 208. (a) Agreements for the furnishing of medical, dental, or podiatric
 services (other than specialist services) as benefits under this Act shall
 provide for payment--
 (1) on the basis of fees for services rendered as benefits, according to
 a fee schedule;
 (2) on a per capita basis, the amount being according to the number of
 individuals eligible for benefits who are on the practitioner's list;
 (3) on a salary basis, whole time or part time; or
 (4) on such combinations or modifications of these bases, including
 separate provision for travel and related expenses, as may be approved by
 the State agency;
according in each health-service area as the majority of the medical
practitioners or of the dental practitioners, respectively, under agreement to
furnish such services shall elect. Provision shall be made for another method
or methods of payment (from among the methods listed in this subsection)
to those medical practitioners or to those dental practitioners who do not
elect the method of such majority, when it is found that such alternative
method of making payments contributes to carrying out the provisions of
section 305 of this Act or otherwise promotes the efficient and economical
provision of medical or dental services in the area.
 (b) Agreements for the furnishing of specialist services as benefits
 under this Act may provide for payments on the basis of fee for service,
 per case, per session, per capita, on salary (whole time or part time),
 or other basis, or combination thereof.
 (c) Any of the methods of making payments from among the methods listed in
 subsection (a) or subsection (b) may be used in making payments to groups or
 practitioners or organizations or other agencies which undertake to provide
 specialist services as well as general medical or general dental services.
 (d) Agreements for the furnishing of hospital services as benefits under
 this Act shall provide for payment on the basis of the reasonable costs
 of hospitalization furnished as benefits. The Board, after consultation
 with the Advisory Council and with representatives of interested hospital
 organizations, may by regulation prescribe maximum rates for hospitalization
 furnished as benefits under this Act, and such maximum rates may be varied
 according to classes of localities or types of service. Payments to hospitals
 shall be based on the least expensive multiple-bed accommodations available
 in the hospital unless the patient's condition makes the use of private
 accommodations essential for his proper medical care. An agreement made
 for furnishing such services shall not affect the right of the hospital
 or other person with whom the agreement is made to require payments from
 patients with respect to the additional cost of more expensive facilities
 occupied at the request of the patient, or with respect to services not
 included as benefits under this Act.
 (e) Agreements for the furnishing of home-nursing services or auxiliary
 services as benefits under this Act shall provide for payment in accordance
 with such methods as the State agency may approve from among those set
 forth in regulations prescribed pursuant to this Act.
 (f) In any health-service area where agreements for the furnishing of general
 medical or general dental services provide for payment only on a per capita
 basis, the per capita payments with respect to those individuals residing
 in the area who have failed to select a practitioner or other person to
 furnish such services to them shall be made on a pro rata basis among the
 practitioners and other persons under agreement to furnish such services
 in the area.
amount of payments for services
 SEC. 209. (a) Rates or amounts of payment for particular services or classes
 of services furnished as benefits under this Act shall be adapted to take
 account of relevant regional, State, or local conditions and practices. In
 arriving at the payments to be made for services of general medical and
 dental practitioners, specialists, professional and practical nurses,
 or other practitioners, regard shall be had for the annual income or its
 equivalent which the payments will provide, and consideration shall be given
 to degree of specialization, and to the skill, experience, and responsibility
 involved in rendering the services. Such payments, together with the other
 terms and conditions of the agreements made under this title, shall be
 adequate to provide professional and financial incentives to practitioners
 to advance in their professions and to practice in localities where their
 services are most needed, to encourage high standards in the quality of
 services furnished, to give assistance in their use of opportunities for
 postgraduate study, and to allow for adequate vacation.
 (b) The rates and amounts of payments fixed under the different methods of
 payments specified in subsections (a), (b), (c), and (e) of section 208,
 and the methods of making payments, shall assure reasonably equivalent
 awards for practitioners selecting different methods of payment, in
 consideration of the value of the services they render.
 (c) Maximum limits upon the number of eligible individuals with respect
 to whom any person may undertake to render services in any local
 health-service area may be fixed by the local administrative committee
 or local administrative officer of that health-service area only on the
 basis of a recommendation of the professional committee in that area that
 such limitation is necessary to maintain high standards in the quality of
 medical, dental, or other services furnished as benefits. Any such limits
 shall take account of professional needs and practices and shall provide
 suitable exceptions for emergency and temporary situations.
 (d) The making of an agreement under section 206 with a group or other
 organization shall not operate to increase the payments to be made pursuant
 to any such agreement over the amounts which, in the absence of such
 group or organization would be payable for the same services pursuant to
 agreements made under section 205 directly with the person or persons who
 furnish the services.
professional rights and responsibilities
 SEC. 210. (a) Any person who enters into an agreement under this title
 may terminate such agreement after reasonable notice and after suitable
 arrangements are made to fulfill professional obligations to eligible
 individuals.
 (b) Every physician, dentist, or nurse agreeing to render services as
 benefits under this Act shall be free to practice his profession in the
 locality of his own choosing, consistent with the requirements of the laws
 of the States.
 (c) Every physician, dentist, nurse, hospital, or other person entering
 into an agreement under this title shall be free to the extent consistent
 with applicable State law and customary professional ethics to accept or
 reject as a patient any individual requesting his services.
 (d) No supervision or control over the details of administration or
 operation, or over the selection, tenure, or compensation of personnel,
 shall be exercised under the authority of this Act over any hospital which
 has agreed to furnish personal health services as benefits.
TITLE III--LOCAL ADMINISTRATION
decentralization of administration
 SEC. 301. In order that personal health-service benefits may be made
 available promptly and in a manner best adapted to local practices,
 conditions, and needs, responsibility for administration of the benefits
 provided under this Act in the several local health-service areas shall be
 decentralized as fully as practicable to local administrative committees
 or local administrative officers, acting with the advice and assistance,
 as provided in this title, of local professional committees and, in the
 case of local administrative officers, the advice and assistance of local
 area committees. The health-service areas of a State shall be those so
 designated in the State plan of operations.
local administrative committee or officer
 SEC. 302. The local administrative agency for each local health-service
 area may, as determined by the State, be either--
 (1) a local administrative committee established in accordance with section
 303, which shall act through a local executive officer; or
 (2) a local administrative officer, who shall act with the advice and
 assistance of a local advisory committee established in accordance with
 section 303.
The local administrative committee or officer, with the advice and assistance
of such local professional committees as may from time to time be established,
shall arrange for the furnishing of personal health-service benefits to
eligible individuals in the area and to that end shall--
 (a) publish, and make readily available to eligible individuals in the area,
 lists of the names of all persons who have agreed to furnish personal health
 services in the area, together with the class or classes of services which
 each has undertaken to furnish;
 (b) disseminate pertinent information concerning the rights and privileges
 under this Act of eligible individuals and of persons qualified to furnish
 personal health services as benefits;
 (c) maintain effective relationships with physicians, dentists, nurses,
 hospitals, and other persons who have entered into agreements to furnish
 personal health services in the area, in order to facilitate the furnishing
 of such services in accordance with such agreements, to assure full and
 prompt payment to such persons for services so furnished, and to enlist
 their full cooperation in the administration of benefits under this Act
 in the area;
 (d) receive and, to the extent possible in the local area, adjust any
 complaints which may be made concerning the administration of benefits
 under this Act in the area;
 (e) perform such other duties (including the making of payments to persons
 furnishing personal health services in the area) as may be assigned by
 the State agency; and
 (f) take or initiate such other administrative action as he finds will
 best carry out, within the area, the provisions of this Act, and best
 effectuate its purposes.
local area committees
 SEC. 303. (a) A local area committee shall be established in each
 health-service area. If designated by the State as a local administrative
 committee, the local area committee shall perform the functions specified
 in section 302 and shall formulate policies for the administration of
 benefits under this Act in the area. If designated as an advisory committee,
 it shall advise and assist in the performance of such functions and the
 formulation of such policies. The committee, whether administrative or
 advisory, shall participate in the solution of problems affecting the
 administration of such benefits, shall promote impartiality and freedom
 from political influence in such administration, and shall perform related
 functions to the end that administration in the area may be responsive to
 the wishes and needs of persons furnishing and receiving benefits in the
 area, be adapted to local practices and resources, and provide adequate
 and high quality personal health services to all eligible individuals.
 (b) Each local area committee shall consist of not less than eight nor more
 than sixteen members. The members shall be so selected that a majority of
 the committee shall be representative of the interests of individuals in
 the area who are eligible for benefits, and the remaining members shall
 be chosen from the several professions, hospitals, and other organizations
 in the area by whom such benefits will be provided.
 (c) The local area committee shall meet as often as may be necessary, and
 whenever one-third or more of the members request a meeting; in the case of
 a local administrative committee, not less frequently than once each month,
 and in the case of a local advisory committee, not less frequently than
 once in each quarter of the year. At least one meeting of the committee
 each year shall be open to the public, notice of which shall be published
 and at which any person in the area may participate. At least once each
 year there shall be a statewide meeting of local administrative officers
 and representatives of local administrative committees. At least once in
 each year there shall be a statewide meeting of representatives of all
 local advisory committees in the State, and any reports or recommendations
 made at such meeting shall on the request of such meeting be transmitted
 through the State agency to the Board.
local professional committees
 SEC. 304. Local committees representative of the persons furnishing personal
 health services in the area shall be established in each health-service area
 to assist the local administrative committee and its executive officer, or
 the local administrative officer and the local advisory committee, as the
 case may be, in the preservation of the customary freedom and responsibility
 (under applicable State law) of practitioners in the exercise of professional
 judgment as to the care of patients, and in the solution of technical
 problems concerning the participation of professional personnel, hospitals,
 and other qualified persons in the provision of personal health services
 as benefits, and to advise the local administrative or executive officer
 and the local area committee regarding matters of professional practice or
 conduct arising in connection with the performance of agreements for the
 provision of such services. Such local committees shall meet on call of
 the local administrative committee or officer, as the case may be, or upon
 their own motion. The members of any such local professional committee may
 be professional members of the local area committee or other professional
 persons or both.
methods of administration
 SEC. 305. (a) In each health-service area the methods of administration
 shall be such as to--
 (1) insure the prompt and efficient care of individuals entitled to personal
 health services as benefits;
 (2) promote personal relationships between physician and patients;
 (3) promote coordination among and between general practitioners,
 specialists, those who furnish auxiliary services, nurses, and hospitals,
 in the furnishing of services under this Act, between them and public-health
 centers and agencies, and educational service, research, and other related
 agencies or institutions, and between preventive, diagnostic, and curative
 services, public and private;
 (4) aid in the prevention of disease, disability, and premature death;
 (5) encourage improvement in the number and distribution of professional
 personnel and facilities; and
 (6) insure the provision of adequate service with the greatest economy
 consistent with high standards of quality.
 (b) Local administrative officers shall be appointed by the State agency
 or the head thereof, in accordance with the merit system provided for in
 the State plan of operations; local administrative committees shall be
 appointed by such agency or the head thereof, from individuals residing
 in the respective health-service areas, and the executive officers
 of such committees shall be appointed by the committees in accordance
 with the merit system; the local health-service areas shall be those so
 designated in such plan; and members of local advisory committees and of
 local professional committees shall be selected in accordance with methods
 set forth in such plan.
 (c) In exercising their functions and discharging their responsibilities
 under this Act, local administrative officers and communities, local
 advisory committees, and local professional committees shall observe the
 provisions of this Act, and of regulations prescribed thereunder, and of
 any regulations, standards, and procedures prescribed by the State agency.
TITLE IV--STATE ADMINISTRATION
declaration of policy
 SEC. 401. It is the intent of Congress that the benefits provided under
 this Act be administered wherever possible by the several States, in
 accordance with plans of operations submitted and approved as provided in
 this title, and in each State insofar as feasible by the same State agency
 which administers, or supervises the administration of, the State's general
 public health and maternal and child health programs.
state plan of operations
 SEC. 402. (a) Any State desiring to assume responsibility for the
 administration in the State of the personal health-service benefits provided
 under this Act to all individuals in the State who are eligible for such
 benefits, may do so for the period beginning October 1, 1990 (when benefits
 first become available under this Act), or for the period beginning October
 1 of any succeeding year, if it has undertaken, through its legislature,
 to administer such benefits in accordance with the provisions of this Act
 and with the provisions of regulations and standards prescribed thereunder,
 and, at least twelve months in advance, has submitted and had approved a
 State plan of operations which--
 (1) designates as the sole agency for the statewide administration of
 benefits under this Act a single State agency duly authorized under the
 law of the State to administer such benefits within the State in accordance
 with the provisions of this Act, the provisions of regulations and standards
 prescribed thereunder, and the provisions of the State plan;
 (2) provides for the designation of a State advisory committee which shall
 include members who are familiar with the needs for personal health services
 in urban and rural areas, and who are representative of the interests of
 individuals in the State who are eligible for benefits, such members to
 constitute a majority, and members chosen from the several professions,
 hospitals, and other organizations in the State by whom such benefits will
 be provided, to advise the State agency in carrying out the administration
 of such benefits in the State;
 (3) provides for the decentralized administration of this Act in the State
 in accordance with title III for the designation of local health-service
 areas, and for such methods of selecting the members of local advisory
 committees and of local professional committees as are calculated to insure
 representation of the nature set forth in sections 303 and 304, respectively;
 (4) provides such methods of administration, including methods relating to
 the establishment and maintenance of personnel standards on a merit basis
 (except that the Board shall exercise no authority with respect to the
 selection, tenure of office, or compensation of any individual employed in
 accordance with such methods), as are found by the Board to be necessary
 for the proper and efficient administration of such benefits in the State;
 (5) provides for the making of surveys of the resources and needs of the
 State, in accordance with section 102(a), and sets forth a program for the
 administration of such benefits in the State which gives reasonable assurance
 (A) that maximum use will be made of all available health personnel and
 facilities desiring to participate in the provision of benefits to eligible
 individuals, (B) that funds allotted to the State for the several classes of
 benefits will be allocated in such manner as to give reasonable assurance of
 the availability of services in all health-service areas in the State, and
 (C) that any maldistribution or other inadequacies in the health personnel
 or facilities available for such purpose, or in the quality of the services
 rendered, will be progressively improved as rapidly as may be practicable;
 (6) provides that the State agency will make such reports in such form and
 containing such information as the Board may from time to time reasonably
 require, and give the Board, upon demand, access to the records upon which
 such information is based;
 (7) provides that all Federal funds paid to the State agency for purposes
 of carrying out this Act in the State shall be properly safeguarded and
 expended solely for the purposes for which paid, and provides for the
 repayment by the State to the United States of any such funds lost by the
 State agency or diverted from the purposes for which paid; and
 (8) provides for cooperation, including where necessary entering into
 working agreements (with any appropriate transfer of funds), with other
 public agencies of the State or of its political subdivisions concerned
 with programs related to the purposes of this Act, and with appropriate
 agencies of other States or of the United States administering this Act,
 or benefits under this Act, in other States.
 (b) The Board shall approve any State plan and any modification thereof
 submitted by the State which it finds complies with the provisions of
 subsection (a). No change in a State plan shall be required within one
 year after initial approval thereof, or within one year after any change
 thereafter required therein, by reason of any change in the regulations
 or standards prescribed pursuant to this Act, except with the consent of
 the State or in accordance with further action by Congress.
 (c) In the event of its disapproval of any plan or any modification therein
 submitted by a State pursuant to this title, the Board shall notify the
 State of such disapproval and shall, upon request of the State, afford it
 reasonable notice and opportunity for a hearing on such disapproval.
 (d) If a State has not prior to October 1, 1990, submitted and had approved
 a plan of operations, the Board shall notify the Governor of the State
 that the Board will be required to administer this Act in the State,
 commencing October 1, 1990. The Board shall provide for the publication
 of such notice in at least two newspapers of general circulation in the
 State. If within sixty days after such notification to the Governor the
 State has not submitted an approvable plan, the Board shall continue such
 administration until one year after the submission and approval of a plan
 of operations in accordance with this section. The Board may waive the
 requirement that a State plan must be submitted and approved one year
 prior to commencement of State administration if it is satisfied in a
 particular case that the substitution of a shorter preparatory period will
 not prejudice the interests of eligible individuals in the State.
 (e) Whenever the Board, after reasonable notice and opportunity for hearing
 to the State, finds that the State, having submitted and had approved a
 plan of operations under this title--
 (1) is not complying substantially with the provisions of such plan, or
 with the provisions of this Act or any regulations or standards prescribed
 thereunder, or
 (2) has withdrawn its plan or failed to change it when and as required by
 a change in this Act or in regulations prescribed thereunder,
the Board shall notify the Governor of the State of such findings, together
with its reasons therefor and a statement concerning the effect of such
findings under this Act, and shall provide for the publication of such notice
in at least two newspapers of general circulation in the State. If within
sixty days following such a notice the State has not taken appropriate action
to bring its plan or its administration thereof into conformity with this
Act and regulations and standards thereunder, the Board shall immediately
assume responsibility for the administration of this Act in the State and
shall administer the same in such State for so long thereafter as the State
fails to give reasonable assurances of substantial compliance or fails to
submit an approvable plan, as the case may be.
 (f) In any State in which the Board has assumed responsibility for the
 administration of benefits under this Act as provided in subsections (d)
 and (e) of this section, the Board shall have and discharge all authority
 and duties, in accordance with the provisions of this Act, which it finds
 necessary for that purpose, and the term `State agency' wherever used in
 title II or title III of this Act shall be deemed to refer to the Board.
 (g) Nothing in this Act shall preclude any State or any political
 subdivision thereof, whether or not the State has assumed responsibility
 for the administration of benefits under this Act, from furnishing, with
 funds available from sources other than the account, any additional health
 services to individuals who are eligible for benefits under this Act or
 any or all health services to individuals who are not so eligible.
TITLE V--NATIONAL HEALTH INSURANCE BOARD; NATIONAL ADVISORY MEDICAL POLICY
COUNCIL; GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
national health insurance board
 SEC. 501. (a) There is hereby established in the Department of Health and
 Human Services a National Health Insurance Board, to be composed of five
 members, three of whom shall be appointed by the President by and with
 the advice and consent of the Senate, and the other two of whom shall be
 the Surgeon General of the Public Health Service and the Commissioner of
 Social Security. During his term of membership on the Board, no appointed
 member shall engage in any other business, vocation, or employment. At
 least one of the appointed members shall be a doctor of medicine licensed
 to practice medicine or surgery in one of the States. Each appointed
 member shall receive a salary at an annual rate of basic pay, established
 by the President, which is not less than the annual rate of basic pay for
 positions at level V of the Executive Schedule and which is not greater than
 the annual rate of basic pay for positions at level IV of the Executive
 Schedule, and shall hold office for a term of six years, except that (1)
 any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of
 the term for which his predecessor was appointed shall be appointed for the
 remainder of such term; and (2) the terms of office of the members first
 taking office after the date of the enactment of this Act shall expire, as
 designated by the President at the time of appointment, one at the end of
 two years, one at the end of four years, and one at the end of six years,
 after the date of the enactment of this Act. The President shall designate
 one of the appointed members as the Chairman of the Board.
 (b) All functions of the Board shall be administered by the Board under the
 direction and supervision of the Secretary of Health and Human Services. The
 board shall perform such functions as it finds necessary to carry out
 the provisions of this Act, and shall make all regulations and standards
 specifically authorized to be made in this Act and such other regulations
 not inconsistent with this Act as may be necessary. The Board may delegate
 to any of its members, officers, or employees, or with the approval of the
 Secretary to any other officer or employee of the Department of Health
 and Human Services, such of its powers or duties, except that of making
 regulations, as it may consider necessary and proper to carry out the
 provisions of this Act. The Board may also enter into agreements for the
 furnishing or provision of personal health services under this Act without
 regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, pertaining to the
 appointment, status, or compensation of Federal employees, or pertaining
 to contracts for personal services, and without regard to section 3709
 of the Revised Statutes (41 U.S.C. 5), and any person rendering services
 pursuant to an agreement so made shall not by reason thereof be deemed to
 be an employee of the United States.
 (c) In administering the provisions of this Act, the Board is authorized to
 utilize the services and facilities of any executive department or other
 agency of the United States in accordance with an agreement with the head
 thereof. Payment for such services and facilities shall be made in advance
 or by way of reimbursement, as may be agreed upon with the head of the
 executive department or other agency furnishing them.
 (d) Personnel of the Board shall be appointed by the Secretary upon
 recommendation of the Board. The Secretary is authorized to detail to
 the Board, upon its request, any officer or employee of the Department of
 Health and Human Services, and in his discretion to reimburse, from funds
 available for the administration of this Act, the appropriation from which
 the salary or, in the case of commissioned officers of the Public Health
 Service, the pay and allowances of such officer or employee are paid.
 (e) Upon the request of any State agency administering a State plan of
 operations pursuant to title IV of this Act, or upon the request of any
 State desiring to prepare and submit a plan of operations, any officer
 or employee of the Board (including any officer or employee detailed to
 the Board pursuant to subsection (d)) may be detailed by the Board to
 assist in the administration, or in the preparation, of such State plan of
 operations. The funds available for the Federal administration of this Act
 may, in the discretion of the Secretary, be reimbursed from funds allotted
 to the State pursuant to section 802 and available for State administration,
 for the salary (or for the pay and allowances) of any officer or employee
 so detailed.
advisory council
 SEC. 502. (a) There is hereby established a National Advisory Medical
 Policy Council to consist of the Chairman of the Board, who shall serve as
 Chairman of the Advisory Council ex officio, and sixteen members appointed
 by the Secretary of Health and Human Services. At least eight of the sixteen
 appointed members shall be individuals who are familiar with the need for
 personal health services in urban or rural areas and who are representative
 of the interests of individuals eligible for benefits under this Act, and
 at least six of the members shall be individuals who are outstanding in
 the medical or other professions concerned with the provision of services
 provided as benefits under this Act and who are representative of the
 individuals, organizations, and other persons by whom personal health
 services will be provided. Each appointed member shall hold office for
 a term of four years, except that any member appointed to fill a vacancy
 occurring prior to the expiration of the term for which his predecessor
 was appointed shall be appointed for the remainder of that term, and the
 terms of the members first taking office shall expire, as designated by the
 Secretary at the time of appointment, four at the end of the first year,
 four at the end of the second year, four at the end of the third year,
 and four at the end of the fourth year after the date of appointment. The
 Advisory Council is authorized to appoint such special advisory technical
 or professional committees as may be useful in carrying out its functions,
 and the members of such committees may be members of the Advisory Council,
 or other persons, or both. Appointed Advisory Council members and members
 of technical or professional committees, while serving on business of the
 Council (inclusive of traveltime), shall receive compensation at rates fixed
 by the Secretary, but not exceeding $200 per day, and shall be entitled
 to receive actual and necessary traveling expenses and per diem in lieu
 of subsistence while so serving away from their places of residence. The
 Advisory Council, its appointed members, and its committees, shall be
 provided with such secretarial, clerical, or other assistance as may be
 provided by the Congress for carrying out their respective functions. The
 Advisory Council shall meet as frequently as the Board deems necessary,
 but not less than twice each year. Upon request by six or more members,
 it shall be the duty of the Chairman to call a meeting of the Council.
 (b) The Advisory Council shall advise the Board with reference to matters of
 general policy and administration arising in connection with the making
 of regulations, the establishment of professional standards, and the
 performance of its other duties under this Act.
 (c) Section 14 of the Federal Advisory Committee Act shall not apply to
 the Advisory Council.
studies, recommendations, and reports
 SEC. 503. The Board shall have the duty of studying and making
 recommendations as to the most effective methods of providing health
 services, and as to legislation and matters of administrative policy
 concerning health and related subjects. At the beginning of each regular
 session of Congress, it shall make a full report to Congress of the
 administration of this Act, including a report with regard to the adequacy
 of its financial provisions contained in this Act and of appropriations
 made pursuant thereto, the methods of allotment of funds among the States,
 and related matters. Such report shall include a record of consultations
 with the Advisory Council, recommendations of the Advisory Council, and
 comments thereon.
nondisclosure of information
 SEC. 504. Information concerning an individual, obtained from him or
 from any physician, dentist, nurse, or hospital, or from any other person
 pursuant to or as a result of the administration of this Act, shall be held
 confidential (except for statistical purposes) and shall not be disclosed
 or be open to public inspection in any manner revealing the identity of the
 individual or other person from whom the information was obtained or to
 whom the information pertains, except as may be necessary for the proper
 administration of this Act or of other laws, State or Federal. Any person
 who shall violate any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of
 a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine
 not exceeding $10,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding one year, or both.
prohibition against discrimination
 SEC. 505. In carrying out the provisions of this Act there shall be no
 discrimination on account of race, creed, or color. Personal health services
 shall be made available as benefits to all eligible individuals, and all
 persons qualified under title II to enter into agreements to furnish or
 provide such services shall be permitted to do so.
TITLE VI--ELIGIBILITY DETERMINATIONS, COMPLAINTS, HEARINGS, AND JUDICIAL REVIEW
determinations as to eligibility for benefits
 SEC. 601. (a) The Secretary of Health and Human Services through such
 units of the Department of Health and Human Services as he may determine,
 shall upon his own initiative or upon application of any individual make
 determinations as to the eligibility of individuals for benefits under this
 Act. Whenever requested by any individual determined by the Secretary not
 to be eligible for benefits for any period, or by a dependent of any such
 individual, the Secretary shall give such individual or such dependent
 reasonable notice and opportunity for a hearing with respect to such
 determination and on the basis of the evidence adduced at the hearing
 shall affirm, modify, or reverse his determination.
 (b) In carrying out his responsibility under this section, the Secretary
 shall have all the powers and duties conferred upon him under sections 205
 and 206 of the Social Security Act. Such powers and duties shall be subject
 to the same limitations and rights of judicial review as are contained in
 section 205 of such Act. Eligibility for benefits under this title based on
 entitlement to an annuity under subchapter III (relating to civil service
 retirement) of chapter 83 of title 5, United States Code, shall be determined
 on the basis of certification by the Office of Personnel Management.
 (c) Nothing in title IV of this Act shall be deemed to require or authorize
 any assumption by the State agency, designated in accordance with an
 approved State plan of operations approved under such title, of any of
 the Secretary's responsibilities under this section, but the Secretary may
 utilize existing facilities and services of any such agency on the basis
 of mutual agreements with such agency.
complaints of eligible individuals and of persons furnishing benefits
 SEC. 602. (a) Any eligible individual aggrieved by reason of his failure to
 receive any personal health-service benefits to which he believes himself
 entitled, or dissatisfied with any service rendered him as a personal
 health-service benefit, and any person who has entered into an agreement to
 furnish services as personal health-service benefits and who is aggrieved by
 the failure or alleged failure of a local or other administrative officer or
 a local administrative committee to carry out the agreement in accordance
 with its terms, may make a complaint to the local administrative officer
 or local executive officer in the area in which the action or inaction
 complained of occurred, or to such other officer as may be provided in
 regulations. If the officer to whom such complaint is made finds, after
 investigation, that the complaint is well founded, he shall promptly take
 such steps as may be necessary and appropriate to correct the action or
 inaction complained of; and he shall notify the individual or other person
 making the complaint of his disposition thereof. Any such individual or
 other person dissatisfied with the action taken may in writing request a
 hearing thereon and shall be afforded opportunity for the same pursuant
 to subsection (b) of this section.
 (b) Provision shall be made for the establishment of necessary and sufficient
 impartial tribunals to afford hearings to individuals and other persons
 entitled thereto under subsection (a) of this section, or section 207(d)
 of this Act, and for further review of the findings, conclusions, and
 recommendations of such tribunals, in accordance with regulations made
 by the Board, after consultation with the Advisory Council. With respect
 to any complaint involving matters or questions of professional practice
 or conduct, the hearing body shall contain competent and disinterested
 professional representation; and with respect to any complaint involving
 only matters or questions of professional practice or conduct the hearing
 body shall consist exclusively of such professional persons.
 (c) In administering this section in any State which has not assumed
 responsibility for the administration of benefits under this Act as provided
 in title IV, the Board (subject to the provisions of section 501(b))
 shall, insofar as they are applicable to its functions under this Act,
 have all the powers and duties conferred upon the Secretary by sections
 205 and 206 of the Social Security Act. Such powers and duties shall be
 subject to the limitations and rights of judicial review contained in
 section 205 of such Act.
 (d) In any State which has assumed responsibility for the administration
 of benefits under this Act as provided in title IV the powers and duties of
 the State agency shall be subject to such rights of judicial review in the
 courts of the State as the law of the State may provide; subject, however,
 to review by the Supreme Court of the United States in such cases and in such
 manner as is provided in section 1257 of title 28 of the United States Code.
TITLE VII--APPLICATION OF ACT TO INDIVIDUALS COVERED UNDER MEDICARE PROGRAM
eligibility; benefits available
 SEC. 701. (a) In the case of any individual who is entitled to hospital
 insurance benefits under part A of title XVIII of the Social Security Act,
 or to supplementary medical insurance benefits under the insurance program
 established by part B of such title, during any benefit year or part thereof
 in which he is otherwise eligible for benefits under this Act in accordance
 with section 104 or would otherwise be furnished such benefits in accordance
 with section 105, the personal health services (specified in section 101)
 which may be made available to him as benefits under this Act shall be
 limited to those services (otherwise available to him in accordance with
 section 102) for which he is ineligible under part A or B of such title
 XVIII. For purposes of the preceding sentence, an individual shall be
 considered ineligible under part A or B of such title XVIII if no payment
 is or can be made to him or on his behalf thereunder with respect to the
 item or service involved, whether because he is not entitled to benefits
 under whichever such part is applicable, because no payment is provided
 under either such part for the item or service involved, or because he
 has exhausted his entitlement to have payment made thereunder for items
 or services of the type involved; and shall also be considered ineligible
 under part A or B of such title XVIII with respect to any item or service
 (for which he is otherwise entitled to have payment made thereunder) to
 the extent that payment is not made with respect to such item or service
 because of the application of the deductible and coinsurance provisions
 of sections 1813 and 1833 of the Social Security Act.
 (b) The Board, after consultation with the Advisory Council, shall prescribe
 such regulations as may be necessary or appropriate to insure, in the case
 of individuals whose benefits under this Act are limited under subsection
 (a), that the combination of benefits under this Act and title XVIII of
 the Social Security Act will effectively carry out (without duplication
 of benefits) the purpose of this Act.
 (c) The limitation under subsection (a) of an individual's benefits
 under this Act shall not be construed as affecting the eligibility of his
 dependents for such benefits in accordance with subsection (a)(3) or (b)(3)
 of section 104.
study and report
 SEC. 702. As soon as practicable after the enactment of this Act the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services shall undertake and carry out a
 full and complete study of the interrelationship of the program of national
 health insurance under this Act and the program of health insurance for the
 aged under title XVIII of the Social Security Act, in order to determine
 the way in which the latter program may be most effectively and equitably
 transferred to and incorporated in the program under this Act. In conducting
 such study, the Secretary shall give particular attention to the transitional
 problems which would result from such a transfer, and shall consider in
 detail (with respect to each such program) the benefits provided, the
 standards of eligibility therefor, the standards and qualifications for
 participation by providers of services of various types, the methods of
 administration, the costs and methods of financing, and any other matters
 which might assist in making such determination and in insuring that all
 desirable features of the program under title XVIII of the Social Security
 Act will to the maximum extent feasible be preserved with respect to the
 individuals covered by that program (and, in appropriate cases, included in
 the program under this Act for all individuals who are eligible thereunder,
 without regard to any transfer). The Secretary shall submit to the President
 and the Congress, no later than one year after the date of the enactment
 of this Act, a complete report of the study conducted under this section
 together with his findings as to the most effective and equitable way in
 which the transfer under consideration could be effected and his detailed
 recommendations for legislative, administrative, and other actions to
 accomplish it.
TITLE VIII--FISCAL PROVISIONS
personal health services account
 SEC. 801. (a) There is hereby created on the books of the Treasury of the
 United States a separate account to be known as the `Personal Health Services
 Account' (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the `account'). Funds
 in the account not required for current withdrawals shall be invested by
 the Secretary of the Treasury in the types of obligations which may be
 acquired, under section 201 of the Social Security Act, by the Federal
 Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Disability
 Insurance Trust Fund. Funds in the account shall be available for all
 expenditures necessary or appropriate to carry out this Act; except that
 (subject to the provisions of section 802(g)) only so much of such funds
 shall be available for salaries or other administrative expenses of any
 department or agency of the United States as may be authorized in annual
 or other appropriation Acts.
 (b) There shall be appropriated to the account for the fiscal year 1990,
 and for each fiscal year thereafter--
 (1) sums equal to 3 percent of all wages estimated to be received during
 such fiscal year;
 (2) sums equal to the estimated cost of furnishing dental services and
 home-nursing services as personal health-service benefits during such
 fiscal year; and
 (3) any further sums required to meet expenditures to carry out this Act.
 (c) There shall be appropriated to the account in the fiscal year 1990,
 a sum equal to 1 percent of all wages estimated to be received during such
 fiscal year, to constitute on October 1, 1990, a reserve in the account
 for the purposes specified in section 802(a).
 (d) The aggregate appropriations to the account, pursuant to clauses
 (2) and (3) of subsection (b), in appropriation Acts for any fiscal year
 ending in 1990, 1991, or, 1992, shall not exceed one-half of 1 percent,
 and in appropriation Acts for any fiscal year ending in 1993, 1994,
 or, 1995 shall not exceed 1 percent, of the estimated annual average of
 all wages received during the three fiscal years preceding such fiscal
 year. Whenever an appropriation is made on the basis of an estimate of wages
 to be received during a fiscal year, the appropriations for subsequent
 fiscal years shall be adjusted by any amount by which such estimate was
 greater or less than the amount of wages actually received. Before January
 1, 1995, and periodically thereafter, the Congress will review this Act
 and will determine the amounts of appropriations to be made thereafter.
 (e) Sums received as reimbursements to the account pursuant to section 104(c)
 or section 105, or by virtue of subrogation pursuant to section 104(c),
 shall be deposited in the account and shall be available in accordance
 with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section.
allotment of funds
 SEC. 802. (a) The Board, after consultation with the Advisory Council, shall
 determine, as far in advance of the beginning of each fiscal year as is
 possible, the sums which shall be available from the account for provision
 during the fiscal year of all classes, and of each of the five classes,
 of personal health-service benefits specified in section 101(a). Such
 sums shall be determined, after taking into consideration the estimated
 amount which will be in the account at the beginning of the fiscal year
 and the anticipated income of the account thereafter, with a view (1)
 to maintaining as nearly as practicable a uniform rate of expenditure for
 personal health-service benefits in successive fiscal years, except for
 appropriated allowance on account of anticipated increase in the personnel
 and facilities available to furnish personal health-service benefits and on
 account of reduction or withdrawal of restrictions or limitations pursuant
 to section 102(b), and (2) to establishing and maintaining a reserve in the
 account adequate to meet emergency demands in accordance with subsection
 (d) of this section and adequate to maintain the rate of expenditure or
 to permit its gradual reduction if the income of the account should fall
 below the income which had been anticipated.
 (b) In accordance with regulations prescribed after consultation with the
 State agencies, the Board, prior to the beginning of each fiscal year shall
 allot to the several States, for the fiscal years 1990, 1991, and 1992,
 90 percent, and for each fiscal year thereafter 95 percent of each sum
 determined pursuant to subsection (a). Such regulations shall provide for
 allotments on the basis of--
 (1) the population in the several States eligible for benefits under
 this Act;
 (2) professional and other personnel, hospitals, and other facilities,
 and supplies and commodities, to be available in the several States in
 the provision of such benefits; and
 (3) the cost of reasonable and equitable compensation to such personnel
 and facilities and for such supplies and commodities.
Such allotments shall operate, to the maximum extent possible, both to assure
provision to eligible individuals of adequate personal health-service benefits
in all States and all local health-service areas, and also to increase the
adequacy of services where personnel and facilities are below the national
average.
 (c) From time to time during each fiscal year, the Board shall allot to
 the several States the remaining 10 percent or the remaining 5 percent,
 as the case may be, of each sum determined pursuant to subsection
 (a). In making allotments under this subsection, the Board shall take
 into consideration the factors specified in subsection (b), but shall,
 in addition, give special consideration to the extent of which allotments
 under subsection (b) have proved to be insufficient to permit provision
 of reasonably adequate benefits under this Act.
 (d) In addition to the sums determined pursuant to subsection (a) to be
 available for the provision of personal health-service benefits, the
 Board, after consultation with the Advisory Council, is authorized to
 make emergency allotments from the account if it finds that a disaster,
 epidemic, or other cause has substantially increased the volume of personal
 health-service benefits required in any part of the United States over the
 volume anticipated when the determinations pursuant to subsection (a) were
 made. Allotments pursuant to this subsection shall be made to such State
 or States, for such class or classes of personal health-service benefits,
 and in such amounts, as the Board may find necessary to meet the emergency.
 (e) The Board shall from time to time determine the amounts to be paid
 to each State from its allotments under this section, and shall certify
 to the Secretary of the Treasury the amounts so determined. The Secretary
 shall thereupon, and prior to audit or settlement by the General Accounting
 Office, pay to the State the amounts so certified.
 (f) Funds paid to a State for any class of personal health-service benefits
 shall be used exclusively for the provision of benefits of that class,
 except that the administrative costs of the State in administering personal
 health-service benefits under this Act may be met from the allotments to
 the State. Such administrative costs, which in any fiscal year shall not
 exceed 5 percent of the aggregate allotments to the State for such fiscal
 year, shall be apportioned as between the several allotments in accordance
 with the costs of administering the respective classes of benefits;
 and such apportionment may be made in such manner, and by such sampling,
 statistical, or other methods, as may be agreed upon between the Board
 and the State agency.
 (g) In any case in which the Board has assumed responsibility for the
 administration in a State of benefits under this Act in accordance with
 section 402 (d) or (e), all allotments or balances of allotments to such
 State shall be available for expenditure by the Board for the provision of
 personal health-service benefits in that State, and (until the Congress
 shall make funds available therefor pursuant to section 801(a)) for the
 costs of administration of such benefits in such State. Expenditures
 authorized pursuant to section 801(a) for such costs of administration
 shall be charged against allotments to such State.
grants-in-aid for training and education
 SEC. 803. (a) For the purpose of increasing the availability of training and
 education for professional and technical personnel engaged or undertaking
 to engage in the provision or administration of personal health services as
 benefits under this Act, and to carry out the policies of section 209(a),
 the Board is authorized to make grants--
 (1) to public or nonprofit institutions or agencies engaging in undergraduate
 or postgraduate professional, technical, or administration education
 or training, for the cost (in whole or in part) of courses or projects
 which the Board finds, after consultation with the Advisory Council and
 appropriate Federal departments and agencies, (A) cannot be carried out
 without financial assistance under this section, and (B) show promise of
 making valuable contributions to the education, training, or retraining
 of professional or technical personnel engaged or undertaking to engage
 in the provision or administration of benefits, or
 (2) to individuals who are professional or technical persons engaged or who
 undertake to engage in the provision of personal health-service benefits,
 or who are engaged or undertake to engage in the administration of such
 benefits, for maintenance (in whole or in part) while in attendance at
 courses or projects assisted under paragraph (1) or approved by the Board
 for similar training or education, and for costs of necessary travel.
 (b) Such grants, in such amounts and for payment at such times as are
 approved by the Board, shall be certified for payment to the Secretary
 of the Treasury, who shall pay them from the account to the designated
 individuals, institutions, or agencies.
 (c) For the purposes of this section there shall be available for the fiscal
 year 1990 the sum of $50,000, for the fiscal year 1990 the sum of $50,000,
 and for each fiscal year thereafter an amount not to exceed one-half of
 1 percent of the amount expended for benefits under this Act in the last
 preceding calendar year.
TITLE IX-- MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
definition
 SEC. 901. As used in this Act:
 (1) The term `wages' means the sum of the following items, excluding
 any amount in excess of the applicable contribution and benefit base (as
 determined under section 230 of the Social Security Act) which is received
 (or, in the case of income from self-employment, accrued) by any individual
 during any calendar year--
 (A) all remuneration for employment, including the cash value of all
 remuneration paid in any medium other than cash; except that such term
 does not include--
 (i) the amount of any payment made to, or on behalf of, an employee under
 a plan or system established by an employer which makes provision for his
 employees generally or for a class or classes of his employees (including
 any amount paid by an employer for insurance or annuities, or into a fund
 to provide for any such payment), on account of retirement, or sickness or
 accident disability, or medical and hospitalization expenses in connection
 with sickness or accident disability, or death; provided, in the case
 of a death benefit, that the employee (I) has not the option to receive,
 instead of provision for such death benefit, any part of such payment or,
 if such death benefit is insured, any part of the premiums (or contributions
 to premiums) paid by his employer, and (II) has not the right, under the
 provisions of the plan or system or policy of insuracne providing for such
 death benefit, to assign such benefit, or to receive a cash consideration
 in lieu of such benefit either upon his withdrawal from the plan or system
 providing for such benefit or upon termination of such plan or system or
 policy of insurance or of his employment with such employer;
 (ii) the payment by an employer (without deductions from the remuneration
 of the employee) of any social-insurance taxes or contributions imposed
 upon an employee; or
 (iii) the value of services exchanged for other services for which there
 is no payment other than the exchange; and
 (B) all net income from farm, business, professional, or other
 self-employment.
 (2) The term `employment' means any service of whatever nature performed by
 an employee for the person employing him, irrespective of the citizenship or
 residence of either, within United States, or on or in connection with an
 American vessel or an American civil aircraft under a contract of service
 which is entered into within the United States or during the performance
 of which the vessel or aircraft touches at a port or airport in the United
 States, if the employee is employed on and in connection with such vessel
 or aircraft when outside the United States, except--
 (A) service on active duty in the Armed Forces of the United States;
 (B) service performed in the employ of a State or any political subdivision
 thereof, or any instrumentality of any one or more of the foregoing which
 is wholly owned by one or more States or political subdivisions;
 (C) casual labor not in the course of the employer's trade or business;
 (D) service performed by an employee on or in connection with a vessel
 not an American vessel, or an aircraft not an American aircraft, if the
 employee is employed on and in connection with such vessel or aircraft
 when outside the United States;
 (E) service performed by a duly ordained or duty commissioned or licensed
 minister of any church in the regular exercise of his ministry and service
 performed by a regular member of a religious order in the exercise of
 duties required by such order;
 (F) service performed by an individual as an employee or employee
 representative as defined in section 1 of the Railroad Retirement Act of
 1937 or section 1 of the Railroad Retirement Act of 1974;
 (G) service performance in any calendar quarter in the employ of any
 organization exempt from income tax under section 501 of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 if--
 (i) the remuneration for such services does not exceed $45; or
 (ii) such service is in connection with the collection of dues or premiums
 for a fraternal beneficiary society, order, or association, and is performed
 away from the home office or is ritualistic service in connection with
 any such society, order, or association; or
 (iii) such service is performed by a student who is enrolled and is
 regularly attending classes at a school, college, or university;
 (H) service performed in the employ of a foreign government (including
 service as a consular or other officer or employee or a nondiplomatic
 representative);
 (I) service performed in the employ of an instrumentality wholly owned by
 a foreign government, if--
 (i) the service is of a character similar to that performed in foreign
 countries by employees of the United States Government or of an
 instrumentality thereof; and
 (ii) the Secretary of State shall certify to the Secretary of Health
 and Human Services that the foreign government, with respect to whose
 instrumentality and employees thereof exemption is claimed, grants an
 equivalent exemption with respect to similar service performed in the
 foreign country by employees of the United States Government and of
 instrumentalities thereof; and
 (J) service performed in the employ of an international organization
 entitled to enjoy privileges, exemptions, and immunities as an international
 organization under the International Organizations Immunities Act.
 (3) In any case in which an individual has received wages equal to the
 applicable contribution and benefit base (as determined under section 230
 of the Social Security Act), in a calendar year, not less than $150 of such
 wages shall be deemed, for the purpose of section 104(a), to have been
 received by him in the quarter during which the first of such wages were
 in fact received by him and in each quarter of such calendar year thereafter.
 (4) The term `benefit year' means a period commencing on July 1 of any
 year and ending on June 30 of the succeeding year.
 (5) The term `quarter' and the term `calendar quarter' mean a period of three
 calendar months ending on March 31, June 30, September 30, or December 31.
 (6) The term `employee' includes (in addition to any individual who is a
 servant under the law of master and servant) any individual who performs
 service, of whatever nature, for a person, unless the service is performed by
 the individual in pursuit of his own independently established business. The
 term `employee' also includes an officer of a corporation.
 (7) The term `American vessel' means any vessel documented or numbered
 under the laws of the United States; and includes any vessel which is
 neither documented nor numbered under the laws of any foreign country,
 if its crew is employed solely by one or more citizens or residents of
 the United States or corporations organized under the laws of the United
 States or of any State.
 (8) The term `American aircraft' means an aircraft registered under the
 laws of the United States.
 (9) The term `State' includes the District of Columbia.
 (10) The term `United States', when used in a geographic sense, means the
 several States, as defined in paragraph (9).
 (11) The term `dependent' means an unmarried child (including a stepchild,
 adopted, or foster child) of an individual, who is under the age of eighteen,
 or who is under a total disability which has continued for a period of not
 less than six consecutive calendar months and is living with such individual
 or receiving regular support from him; a wife of an individual living with
 such individual or receiving regular support from him; a husband who is
 under a total disability which has continued for a period of not less than
 six consecutive calendar months, and is living with or receiving regular
 and substantial support from such individual; and a parent who is living
 with or receiving regular and substantial support from such individual.
 (12) The term `person' means an individual, a trust or estate, a partnership,
 a corporation, an association, a consumer cooperative, or other organization.
effective date
 SEC. 902. The effective date of this Act shall be the date of its enactment,
 but personal health services shall first become available as benefits in
 accordance with this Act on October 1, 1990.