[Congressional Bills 115th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[S. 2984 Introduced in Senate (IS)]

<DOC>

115th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 S. 2984

To amend the Higher Education Act of 1965 to provide greater access to 
 higher education for America's students, to eliminate educational 
 barriers for participation in a public service career, and for other 
 purposes.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES

 May 24, 2018

 Mr. Cardin introduced the following bill; which was read twice and 
 referred to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

To amend the Higher Education Act of 1965 to provide greater access to 
 higher education for America's students, to eliminate educational 
 barriers for participation in a public service career, and for other 
 purposes.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

 This Act may be cited as the ``Strengthening American Communities 
Act of 2018''.

SEC. 2. PURPOSE.

 It is the purpose of this Act to provide greater access to higher 
education for America's students, to eliminate educational barriers for 
participation in a public service career by providing an opportunity 
for potential public servants to obtain an undergraduate education, and 
to establish an accelerated form of the public service loan forgiveness 
program for more immediate loan forgiveness for existing public 
servants holding Federal Direct Stafford Loans, Federal Direct 
Unsubsidized Stafford Loans, and Federal Direct PLUS Loans.

 TITLE I--AMERICA'S COLLEGE PROMISE

SEC. 101. SHORT TITLE.

 This title may be cited as the ``America's College Promise Act of 
2018''.

SEC. 102. PURPOSE.

 The purpose of this title is to help all individuals of the United 
States earn the education and skills the individuals need--
 (1) by making 2 years of community college free, through a 
 new partnership with States and Indian Tribes to help the 
 States and Indian Tribes--
 (A) waive resident community college tuition and 
 fees for eligible students;
 (B) maintain State and Indian Tribe support for 
 higher education; and
 (C) promote key reforms to improve student 
 outcomes; and
 (2) through a new partnership with minority-serving 
 institutions to--
 (A) encourage eligible students to enroll and 
 successfully complete a baccalaureate degree at 
 participating institutions; and
 (B) promote key reforms to improve student 
 outcomes.

 Subtitle A--STATE AND INDIAN TRIBE GRANTS FOR COMMUNITY COLLEGES

SEC. 111. IN GENERAL.

 From amounts appropriated under section 117(a) for any fiscal year, 
the Secretary shall award grants to eligible States and Indian Tribes 
to pay the Federal share of expenditures needed to carry out the 
activities and services described in section 115.

SEC. 112. FEDERAL SHARE; NON-FEDERAL SHARE.

 (a) Federal Share.--
 (1) Formula.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Federal share 
 of a grant under this subtitle shall be based on a formula, 
 determined by the Secretary, that--
 (A) accounts for the State or Indian Tribe's share 
 of eligible students; and
 (B) provides, for each eligible student in the 
 State or Indian Tribe, a per-student amount that is--
 (i) not less than 300 percent of the per-
 student amount of the State or Indian Tribe 
 share, determined under subsection (b), subject 
 to clause (ii); and
 (ii) not greater than 75 percent of--
 (I) for the 2018-2019 award year, 
 the average resident community college 
 tuition and fees per student in all 
 States for the most recent year for 
 which data are available; and
 (II) for each subsequent award 
 year, the average resident community 
 college tuition and fees per student in 
 all States calculated under this 
 subclause for the preceding year, 
 increased by the lesser of--
 (aa) the percentage by 
 which the average resident 
 community college tuition and 
 fees per student in all States 
 for the most recent year for 
 which data are available 
 increased as compared to such 
 average for the preceding year; 
 or
 (bb) 3 percent.
 (2) Exception for certain indian tribes.--In any case in 
 which not less than 75 percent of the students at the community 
 colleges operated or controlled by an Indian Tribe are low-
 income students, the amount of the Federal share for such 
 Indian Tribe shall be not less than 95 percent of the total 
 amount needed to waive tuition and fees for all eligible 
 students enrolled in such community colleges.
 (b) State or Tribal Share.--
 (1) Formula.--
 (A) In general.--The State or Tribal share of a 
 grant under this subtitle for each fiscal year shall be 
 the amount needed to pay 25 percent of the average 
 community college resident tuition and fees per student 
 in all States in the 2018-2019 award year for all 
 eligible students in the State or Indian Tribe, 
 respectively, for such fiscal year, except as provided 
 in subparagraph (B).
 (B) Exception for certain indian tribes.--In a case 
 in which not less than 5 percent of the students at the 
 community colleges operated or controlled by an Indian 
 Tribe are low-income students, the amount of such 
 Indian Tribe's tribal share shall not exceed 5 percent 
 of the total amount needed to waive tuition and fees 
 for all eligible students enrolled in such community 
 colleges.
 (2) Need-based aid.--A State or Indian Tribe may include 
 any need-based financial aid provided through State or Tribal 
 funds to eligible students as part of the State or Tribal 
 share.
 (3) No in-kind contributions.--A State or Indian Tribe 
 shall not include in-kind contributions for purposes of the 
 State or Tribal share described in paragraph (1).

SEC. 113. ELIGIBILITY.

 To be eligible for a grant under this subtitle, a State or Indian 
Tribe shall agree to waive community college resident tuition and fees 
for all eligible students for each year of the grant.

SEC. 114. APPLICATIONS.

 (a) Submission.--For each fiscal year for which a State or Indian 
Tribe desires a grant under this subtitle, an application shall be 
submitted to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing 
such information as the Secretary may require. Such application shall 
be submitted by--
 (1) in the case of a State, the Governor, the State agency 
 with jurisdiction over higher education, or another agency 
 designated by the Governor to administer the program under this 
 subtitle; or
 (2) in the case of an Indian Tribe, the governing body of 
 such Tribe.
 (b) Contents.--Each State or Indian Tribe application shall 
include, at a minimum--
 (1) an estimate of the number of eligible students in the 
 State or Indian Tribe and the cost of waiving community college 
 resident tuition and fees for all eligible students for each 
 fiscal year covered by the grant, with annual increases of an 
 amount that shall not exceed 3 percent of the prior year's 
 average resident community college tuition and fees;
 (2) an assurance that all community colleges in the State 
 or under the jurisdiction of the Indian Tribe, respectively, 
 will waive resident tuition and fees for eligible students in 
 programs that are--
 (A) academic programs with credits that can fully 
 transfer via articulation agreement toward a 
 baccalaureate degree or postbaccalaureate degree at any 
 public institution of higher education in the State; or
 (B) occupational skills training programs that lead 
 to a recognized postsecondary credential that is in an 
 in-demand industry sector or occupation in the State;
 (3) a description of the promising and evidence-based 
 institutional reforms and innovative practices to improve 
 student outcomes, including completion or transfer rates, that 
 have been or will be adopted by the participating community 
 colleges, such as--
 (A) providing comprehensive academic and student 
 support services, including mentoring and advising, 
 especially for low-income, first-generation, adult, and 
 other underrepresented students;
 (B) providing accelerated learning opportunities, 
 such as dual or concurrent enrollment programs, 
 including early college high school programs;
 (C) advancing competency-based education;
 (D) strengthening remedial education, especially 
 for low-income, first-generation, adult and other 
 underrepresented students;
 (E) implementing course redesigns of high-
 enrollment courses to improve student outcomes and 
 reduce cost; or
 (F) utilizing career pathways or degree pathways;
 (4) a description of how the State or Indian Tribe will 
 promote alignment between its public secondary school and 
 postsecondary education systems, including between 2-year and 
 4-year public institutions of higher education and with 
 minority-serving institutions described in section 371(a) of 
 the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1067q(a)), to 
 expand awareness of and access to postsecondary education, 
 reduce the need for remediation and repeated coursework, and 
 improve student outcomes;
 (5) a description of how the State or Indian Tribe will 
 ensure that programs leading to a recognized postsecondary 
 credential meet the quality criteria established by the State 
 under section 123(a) of the Workforce Innovation and 
 Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3153(a)) or other quality criteria 
 determined appropriate by the State or Indian Tribe;
 (6) an assurance that all participating community colleges 
 in the State or under the authority of the Indian Tribe have 
 entered into program participation agreements under section 487 
 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1094); and
 (7) an assurance that, for each year of the grant, the 
 State or Indian Tribe will notify each eligible student of the 
 student's remaining eligibility for assistance under this 
 subtitle.

SEC. 115. ALLOWABLE USES OF FUNDS.

 (a) In General.--A State or Indian Tribe shall use a grant under 
this subtitle only to provide funds to participating community colleges 
to waive resident tuition and fees for eligible students who are 
enrolled in--
 (1) academic programs with credits that can fully transfer 
 via articulation agreement toward a baccalaureate degree or 
 postbaccalaureate degree at any public institution of higher 
 education in the State; or
 (2) occupational skills training programs that lead to a 
 recognized postsecondary credential that is in an in-demand 
 industry sector or occupation in the State.
 (b) Additional Uses.--If a State or Indian Tribe demonstrates to 
the Secretary that it has grant funds remaining after meeting the 
demand for activities described in subsection (a), the State or Indian 
Tribe may use those funds to carry out one or more of the following:
 (1) Expanding the waiver of resident tuition and fees at 
 community college to students who are returning students or 
 otherwise not enrolling in postsecondary education for the 
 first time, and who meet the student eligibility requirements 
 of clauses (i) through (v) of section 116(5)(A).
 (2) Expanding the scope and capacity of high-quality 
 academic and occupational skills training programs at community 
 colleges.
 (3) Improving postsecondary education readiness in the 
 State or Indian Tribe, through outreach and early intervention.
 (4) Expanding access to dual or concurrent enrollment 
 programs, including early college high school programs.
 (5) Improving affordability at 4-year public and private, 
 nonprofit institutions of higher education.
 (c) Use of Funds for Administrative Purposes.--A State or Indian 
Tribe that receives a grant under this subtitle may not use any funds 
provided under this subtitle for administrative purposes relating to 
the grant under this subtitle.
 (d) Maintenance of Effort Required.--
 (1) In general.--A State or Indian Tribe that receives a 
 grant under this subtitle shall provide, with respect to a 
 fiscal year--
 (A) for public and private, nonprofit institutions 
 of higher education in such State or Indian tribe an 
 amount that is equal to or greater than the amount 
 provided for non-capital and non-direct research and 
 development expenses or costs by such State or Indian 
 tribe to such institutions of higher education during 
 the preceding fiscal year for which satisfactory data 
 are available; and
 (B) for student financial aid for paying costs 
 associated with public and private, nonprofit 
 postsecondary education in such State or Indian tribe 
 an amount that is equal to or greater than the amount 
 provided for student financial aid for paying costs 
 associated with public and private, nonprofit 
 postsecondary education by such State or Indian tribe 
 in the preceding fiscal year for which satisfactory 
 data are available.
 (2) Adjustments for biennial appropriations.--The Secretary 
 shall take into consideration any adjustments to the 
 calculations under paragraph (1) that may be required to 
 accurately reflect funding levels in States or Indian tribes 
 with biennial appropriation cycles.
 (3) Waiver.--The Secretary shall waive the requirements of 
 paragraph (1) if the Secretary determines that such a waiver 
 would be equitable due to exceptional or uncontrollable 
 circumstances, such as a natural disaster or a precipitous and 
 unforeseen decline in the financial resources of a State or 
 Indian tribe, as appropriate.
 (4) Violation of maintenance of effort.--Notwithstanding 
 any other provision of law, the Secretary shall withhold from 
 any State or Indian tribe that violates paragraph (1) and does 
 not receive a waiver pursuant to paragraph (3) any amount that 
 would otherwise be available to the State or Indian tribe under 
 this Act until such State or Indian tribe has made significant 
 efforts to correct such violation.
 (e) Annual Report.--
 (1) In general.--A State or Indian Tribe receiving a grant 
 under this subtitle shall submit an annual report to the 
 Secretary describing the uses of grant funds under this 
 subtitle, the progress made in fulfilling the requirements of 
 the grant, and rates of graduation, transfer and attainment of 
 recognized postsecondary credentials at participating community 
 colleges, and including any other information as the Secretary 
 may require.
 (2) Inclusion in hea annual report.--At the discretion of 
 the Secretary, the information required in the report under 
 paragraph (1) may be included in an annual report on higher 
 education required under the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 1001 et seq.).
 (f) Reporting by Secretary.--The Secretary annually shall--
 (1) compile and analyze the information described in 
 subsection (e); and
 (2) prepare and submit a report to the Committee on Health, 
 Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and the Committee 
 on Education and the Workforce of the House of Representatives 
 containing the analysis described in paragraph (1) and an 
 identification of State and Indian Tribe best practices for 
 achieving the purpose of this subtitle.
 (g) Technical Assistance.--The Secretary shall provide technical 
assistance to eligible States and Indian Tribes concerning best 
practices regarding the promising and evidence-based institutional 
reforms and innovative practices to improve student outcomes as 
described in section 114(b)(3) and shall disseminate such best 
practices among the States and Indian Tribes.
 (h) Continuation of Funding.--
 (1) In general.--A State or Indian Tribe receiving a grant 
 under this subtitle for a fiscal year may continue to receive 
 funding under this title for future fiscal years conditioned on 
 the availability of budget authority and on meeting the 
 requirements of the grant, as determined by the Secretary.
 (2) Discontinuation.--The Secretary may discontinue funding 
 of the Federal share of a grant under this subtitle if the 
 State or Indian Tribe has violated the terms of the grant or is 
 not making adequate progress in implementing the reforms 
 described in the application submitted under section 114.

SEC. 116. DEFINITIONS.

 In this subtitle:
 (1) Career pathway.--The term ``career pathway'' has the 
 meaning given the term in section 3 of the Workforce Innovation 
 and Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3102).
 (2) Community college.--The term ``community college'' 
 means a public institution of higher education at which the 
 highest degree that is predominantly awarded to students is an 
 associate's degree, including 2-year tribally controlled 
 colleges under section 316 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
 (20 U.S.C. 1059c) and public 2-year State institutions of 
 higher education.
 (3) Dual or concurrent enrollment program.--The term ``dual 
 or concurrent enrollment program'' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 8101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education 
 Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 7801).
 (4) Early college high school.--The term ``early college 
 high school'' has the meaning given the term in section 8101 of 
 the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
 7801).
 (5) Eligible student.--
 (A) Definition.--The term ``eligible student'' 
 means a student who--
 (i)(I) enrolls in a community college after 
 the date of enactment of this Act; or
 (II) is enrolled in a community college as 
 of the date of enactment of this Act;
 (ii) attends the community college on not 
 less than a half-time basis;
 (iii) is maintaining satisfactory progress, 
 as defined in section 484(c) of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1091(c)), in 
 the student's course of study;
 (iv) qualifies for resident tuition, as 
 determined by the State or Indian Tribe; and
 (v) is enrolled in an eligible program 
 described in section 114(b)(2).
 (B) Special rule.--An otherwise eligible student 
 shall lose eligibility 3 calendar years after first 
 receiving benefits under this subtitle.
 (6) In-demand industry sector or occupation.--The term 
 ``in-demand industry sector or occupation'' has the meaning 
 given the term in section 3 of the Workforce Innovation and 
 Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3102).
 (7) Indian tribe.--The term ``Indian Tribe'' has the 
 meaning given the term (without regard to capitalization) in 
 section 102(2) of the Federally Recognized Indian Tribe List 
 Act of 1994 (25 U.S.C. 5130(2)).
 (8) Institution of higher education.--The term 
 ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 1001).
 (9) Recognized postsecondary credential.--The term 
 ``recognized postsecondary credential'' has the meaning as 
 described in section 3 of the Workforce Innovation and 
 Opportunity Act (29 U.S.C. 3102).
 (10) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Education.
 (11) State.--The term ``State'' has the meaning given the 
 term in section 103 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 1003).

SEC. 117. APPROPRIATIONS.

 (a) Authorization and Appropriations.--For the purpose of making 
grants under this subtitle, there are authorized to be appropriated, 
and there are appropriated--
 (1) $1,515,150,000 for fiscal year 2018;
 (2) $3,352,200,000 for fiscal year 2019;
 (3) $4,277,940,000 for fiscal year 2020;
 (4) $5,988,450,000 for fiscal year 2021;
 (5) $7,837,710,000 for fiscal year 2022;
 (6) $8,974,350,000 for fiscal year 2023;
 (7) $11,302,020,000 for fiscal year 2024;
 (8) $14,451,090,000 for fiscal year 2025;
 (9) $15,077,130,000 for fiscal year 2026; and
 (10) $15,729,810,000 for fiscal year 2027 and each 
 succeeding fiscal year.
 (b) Availability.--Funds appropriated under subsection (a) shall 
remain available to the Secretary until expended.
 (c) Insufficient Funds.--If the amount appropriated under 
subsection (a) for a fiscal year is not sufficient to award each 
participating State and Indian Tribe a grant under this subtitle that 
is equal to the minimum amount of the Federal share described in 
section 112(a), the Secretary may ratably reduce the amount of each 
such grant or take other actions necessary to ensure an equitable 
distribution of such amount.

 Subtitle B--GRANTS TO HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES, 
 HISPANIC-SERVING INSTITUTIONS, ASIAN AMERICAN AND NATIVE AMERICAN 
 PACIFIC ISLANDER-SERVING INSTITUTIONS, TRIBAL COLLEGES AND 
 UNIVERSITIES, ALASKA NATIVE-SERVING INSTITUTIONS, NATIVE HAWAIIAN-
 SERVING INSTITUTIONS, PREDOMINANTLY BLACK INSTITUTIONS, AND NATIVE 
 AMERICAN-SERVING NONTRIBAL INSTITUTIONS

SEC. 121. PATHWAYS TO STUDENT SUCCESS FOR HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES 
 AND UNIVERSITIES.

 (a) In General.--From amounts appropriated under section 124(a) for 
any fiscal year, the Secretary shall award grants to participating 4-
year historically Black colleges or universities that meet the 
requirements of subsection (b) to--
 (1) encourage students to enroll and successfully complete 
 a bachelor's degree at institutions eligible under subsection 
 (b);
 (2) provide incentives to community college students to 
 transfer to institutions eligible under subsection (b) through 
 strong transfer pathways to complete a bachelor's degree 
 program; and
 (3) support institutions eligible under subsection (b) to 
 better serve new and existing students by engaging in reforms 
 and innovations designed to improve completion rates and other 
 student outcomes.
 (b) Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under the 
program under this section, an institution shall be a historically 
Black college or university that--
 (1) has a student body of which not less than 35 percent 
 are low-income students;
 (2) commits to maintaining or adopting and implementing 
 promising and evidence-based institutional reforms and 
 innovative practices to improve the completion rates and other 
 student outcomes, such as--
 (A) providing comprehensive academic and student 
 support services, including mentoring and advising;
 (B) providing accelerated learning opportunities 
 and degree pathways, such as dual or concurrent 
 enrollment programs and pathways to graduate and 
 professional degree programs;
 (C) advancing distance and competency-based 
 education;
 (D) partnering with employers, industry, nonprofit 
 associations, and other groups to provide opportunities 
 to advance learning outside the classroom, including 
 work-based learning opportunities such as internships 
 or apprenticeships or programs designed to improve 
 inter-cultural development and personal growth, such as 
 foreign exchange and study abroad programs;
 (E) reforming remedial education, especially for 
 low-income students, first generation college students, 
 adult students, and other underrepresented students; or
 (F) implementing course redesigns of high-
 enrollment courses to improve student outcomes and 
 reduce cost;
 (3) sets performance goals for improving student outcomes 
 for the duration of the grant; and
 (4) if receiving a grant for transfer students, has 
 articulation agreements with community colleges at the 
 national, State, or local level to ensure that community 
 college credits can fully transfer to the institution.
 (c) Grant Amount.--
 (1) Initial amount.--For the first year that an eligible 
 institution, as described in subsection (b), participates in 
 the grant program under this section and subject to paragraph 
 (3), such eligible institution shall receive a grant in an 
 amount based on the product of--
 (A) the actual cost of tuition and fees at the 
 eligible institution in such year (referred to in this 
 section as the per-student rebate); multiplied by
 (B) the number of eligible students enrolled in the 
 eligible institution for the preceding year.
 (2) Subsequent increases.--For each succeeding year after 
 the first year of the grant program under this section, each 
 eligible institution, as described in subsection (b), that 
 participate in the grant program shall receive a grant in the 
 amount determined under paragraph (1) for such year, except 
 that in no case shall the amount of the per-student rebate for 
 an eligible institution increase by more than 3 percent as 
 compared to the amount of such rebate for the preceding year.
 (3) Limitations.--
 (A) Maximum per-student rebate.--No eligible 
 institution, as described in subsection (b), 
 participating in the grant program under this section 
 shall receive a per-student rebate amount for any year 
 that is greater than the national average of annual 
 tuition and fees at public 4-year institutions of 
 higher education for such year, as determined by the 
 Secretary.
 (B) First year tuition and fees.--During the first 
 year of participation in the grant program under this 
 section, no eligible institution, as described in 
 subsection (b), may increase tuition and fees at a rate 
 greater than any annual increase at the eligible 
 institution in the previous 5 years.
 (d) Application.--An eligible institution, as described in 
subsection (b), that desires a grant under this section shall submit an 
application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and 
containing such information as the Secretary may require.
 (e) Use of Funds.--Funds awarded under this section to an eligible 
institution, as described in subsection (b), shall be used to waive or 
significantly reduce tuition and fees for eligible students in an 
amount of not more than up to the annual per-student rebate amount for 
each student, for not more than the first 60 credits an eligible 
student enrolls in the eligible institution.

SEC. 122. PATHWAYS TO STUDENT SUCCESS FOR HISPANIC-SERVING 
 INSTITUTIONS, ASIAN AMERICAN AND NATIVE AMERICAN PACIFIC 
 ISLANDER-SERVING INSTITUTIONS, TRIBAL COLLEGES AND 
 UNIVERSITIES, ALASKA NATIVE-SERVING INSTITUTIONS, NATIVE 
 HAWAIIAN-SERVING INSTITUTIONS, PREDOMINANTLY BLACK 
 INSTITUTIONS, AND NATIVE AMERICAN-SERVING NONTRIBAL 
 INSTITUTIONS.

 (a) In General.--From amounts appropriated under section 124(a) for 
any fiscal year, the Secretary shall award grants to eligible 4-year 
minority-serving institutions to--
 (1) encourage students to enroll and successfully complete 
 a bachelor's degree at institutions eligible under subsection 
 (b);
 (2) provide incentives to community college students to 
 transfer to institutions eligible under subsection (b) through 
 strong transfer pathways to complete a bachelor's degree 
 program; and
 (3) support institutions eligible under subsection (b) to 
 better serve new and existing students by engaging in reforms 
 and innovations designed to improve completion rates and other 
 student outcomes.
 (b) Institutional Eligibility.--To be eligible to participate and 
receive a grant under this section, an institution shall be a minority-
serving institution with respect to which the majority of degrees 
awarded are baccalaureate degrees or higher that--
 (1) has a student body of which not less than 35 percent 
 are low-income students;
 (2) commits to maintaining or adopting and implementing 
 promising and evidence-based institutional reforms and 
 innovative practices to improve the completion rates and other 
 student outcomes, such as--
 (A) providing comprehensive academic and student 
 support services, including mentoring and advising;
 (B) providing accelerated learning opportunities 
 and degree pathways, such as dual or concurrent 
 enrollment programs and pathways to graduate and 
 professional degree programs;
 (C) advancing distance and competency-based 
 education;
 (D) partnering with employers, industry, nonprofit 
 associations, and other groups to provide opportunities 
 to advance learning outside the classroom, including 
 work-based learning opportunities such as internships 
 or apprenticeships or programs designed to improve 
 inter-cultural development and personal growth, such as 
 foreign exchange and study abroad programs;
 (E) reforming remedial education, especially for 
 low-income students, first generation college students, 
 adult students, and other underrepresented students; 
 and
 (F) implementing course redesigns of high-
 enrollment courses to improve student outcomes and 
 reduce cost;
 (3) sets performance goals for improving student outcomes 
 for the duration of the grant; and
 (4) if receiving a grant for transfer students, has 
 articulation agreements with community colleges at the 
 national, State, or local levels to ensure that community 
 college credits can fully transfer to the institution.
 (c) Grant Amount.--
 (1) Initial amount.--For the first year that an eligible 
 institution, as described in subsection (b), participates in 
 the grant program under this section and subject to paragraph 
 (3), such eligible institution shall receive a grant in an 
 amount based on the product of--
 (A) the actual cost of tuition and fees at the 
 eligible institution in such year (referred to in this 
 section as the per-student rebate); multiplied by
 (B) the number of eligible students enrolled in the 
 eligible institution for the preceding year.
 (2) Subsequent increases.--For each succeeding year after 
 the first year of the grant program under this section, each 
 eligible institution, as described in subsection (b), that 
 participate in the grant program shall receive a grant in the 
 amount determined under paragraph (1) for such year, except 
 that in no case shall the amount of the per-student rebate 
 increase by more than 3 percent as compared to the amount of 
 such rebate for the preceding year.
 (3) Limitations.--
 (A) Maximum per-student rebate.--No eligible 
 institution, as described in subsection (b), 
 participating in the grant program under this section 
 shall receive a per-student rebate amount for a grant 
 year greater than the national average of public 4-year 
 institutional tuition and fees, as determined by the 
 Secretary.
 (B) First year tuition and fees.--During the first 
 year of participation in the grant program under this 
 section, no eligible institution, as described in 
 subsection (b), may increase tuition and fees at a rate 
 greater than any annual increase made by the 
 institution in the previous 5 years.
 (d) Application.--An eligible institution, as described in 
subsection (b), shall submit an application to the Secretary at such 
time, in such a manner, and containing such information as determined 
by the Secretary.
 (e) Use of Funds.--Funds awarded under this section to an eligible 
institution, as described in subsection (b), shall be used to waive or 
significantly reduce tuition and fees for eligible students in an 
amount of not more than up to the annual per-student rebate amount for 
each student, for not more than the first 60 credits an eligible 
student enrolls in the eligible institution.

SEC. 123. DEFINITIONS.

 In this subtitle:
 (1) Eligible student.--
 (A) Definition.--The term ``eligible student'' 
 means a student, regardless of age, who--
 (i)(I) enrolls in a historically Black 
 college or university, or minority-serving 
 institution; or
 (II) transfers from a community college 
 into a historically Black college or 
 university, or minority-serving institution;
 (ii) attends the historically Black college 
 or university, or minority serving institution, 
 on at least a half-time basis; and
 (iii) is maintaining satisfactory progress, 
 as defined in section 484(c) of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1091(c)), in 
 the student's course of study.
 (B) Special rule.--An otherwise eligible student 
 shall lose eligibility 3 calendar years after first 
 receiving benefits under this subtitle.
 (2) Historically black college or university.--The term 
 ``historically Black college or university'' means a part B 
 institution described in section 322(2) of the Higher Education 
 Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1061(2)).
 (3) Low-income student.--The term ``low-income student''--
 (A) shall include any student eligible for a 
 Federal Pell Grant under section 401 of the Higher 
 Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070a); and
 (B) may include a student ineligible for a Federal 
 Pell Grant under section 401 of the Higher Education 
 Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1070a) who is determined by the 
 institution of higher education in which the student is 
 enrolled to be a low-income student based on an 
 analysis of the student's ability to afford the cost of 
 attendance at the institution.
 (4) Minority-serving institution.--The term ``minority-
 serving institution'' means any public or nonprofit institution 
 of higher education--
 (A) described in paragraphs (2) through (7) of 
 section 371(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 
 U.S.C. 1067q(a)); and
 (B) designated as a minority-serving institution by 
 the Secretary.
 (5) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary 
 of Education.

SEC. 124. APPROPRIATIONS.

 (a) Authorization and Appropriations for HBCU and MSI Grants.--For 
the purpose of carrying out sections 121 and 122, there are authorized 
to be appropriated, and there are appropriated--
 (1) $61,050,000 for fiscal year 2018;
 (2) $199,800,000 for fiscal year 2019;
 (3) $1,189,920,000 for fiscal year 2020;
 (4) $1,237,650,000 for fiscal year 2021;
 (5) $1,287,600,000 for fiscal year 2022;
 (6) $1,338,660,000 for fiscal year 2023;
 (7) $1,359,750,000 for fiscal year 2024;
 (8) $1,449,660,000 for fiscal year 2025;
 (9) $1,508,490,000 for fiscal year 2026; and
 (10) $1,569,540,000 for fiscal year 2027 and each 
 succeeding fiscal year.
 (b) Availability.--Funds appropriated under subsection (a) are to 
remain available to the Secretary until expended.
 (c) Insufficient Funds.--If the amount appropriated under 
subsection (a) for a fiscal year is not sufficient to award each 
participating institution in the grant programs under sections 121 and 
122 a grant under this subtitle that is equal to 100 percent of the 
grant amount determined under sections 121(c) and 122(c), as 
applicable, the Secretary may ratably reduce the amount of each such 
grant or take other actions necessary to ensure an equitable 
distribution of such amount.

 TITLE II--NATIONAL PUBLIC SERVICE EDUCATION GRANT PROGRAM

SEC. 201. NATIONAL PUBLIC SERVICE EDUCATION GRANT PROGRAM.

 Part A of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 
1070 et seq.) is amended by adding at the end the following:

 ``Subpart 11--National Public Service Education Grant Program

``SEC. 420T. NATIONAL PUBLIC SERVICE EDUCATION GRANT PROGRAM.

 ``(a) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Cost of attendance.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `cost of attendance' 
 means tuition, fees, on-campus room and board, books 
 and supplies, personal expenses, and transportation.
 ``(B) On-campus room and board.--The term `on-
 campus room and board' means--
 ``(i) the cost to a student of a double 
 room on campus; and
 ``(ii) the cost of a resident student meal 
 plan.
 ``(2) Eligible institution.--The term `eligible 
 institution' means a public 4-year institution of higher 
 education or a private, nonprofit 4-year institution of higher 
 education.
 ``(3) Eligible student.--The term `eligible student' means 
 a student who--
 ``(A) has received an associate's degree or has 
 earned not less than 60 credits toward a baccalaureate 
 degree;
 ``(B) is enrolled, at an eligible institution 
 awarded a grant under this section, on a full-time 
 basis in a course of study that will lead to employment 
 in a public service job; and
 ``(C) has submitted a Free Application for Federal 
 Student Aid (FAFSA) to the Department.
 ``(4) Public service job.--The term `public service job' 
 has the meaning given the term in section 455(m)(3)(B).
 ``(b) Establishment of Program.--The Secretary shall establish a 
National Public Service Education Grant program to assist in paying for 
the cost of attendance for an undergraduate education to students who 
commit to work for not less than 3 years in a public service job upon 
completion of their baccalaureate degree.
 ``(c) Grants From the Department to Eligible Institutions.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall award grants to 
 eligible institutions to enable the eligible institutions to 
 award grants to eligible students who commit to work for not 
 less than 3 years in a public service job upon completion of 
 their baccalaureate degree.
 ``(2) Duration.--Grants awarded to eligible institutions 
 under this subsection shall be 5 years in duration. Subject to 
 subsection (e), such a grant may be extended for additional 5-
 year periods.
 ``(3) Amounts.--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (B), the Secretary shall award a grant to 
 an eligible institution under this subsection for a 
 fiscal year in an amount equal to the lesser of--
 ``(i) the average annual cost of in-State 
 tuition, fees, and on-campus room and board in 
 the State in which the institution is located 
 at a public 4-year institution of higher 
 education during the fiscal year multiplied by 
 the number of eligible students enrolled at the 
 institution who apply for a grant under this 
 section during the fiscal year; or
 ``(ii) the actual annual cost of tuition, 
 fees, and on-campus room and board at the 
 eligible institution during the fiscal year 
 multiplied by the number of eligible students 
 enrolled at the institution who apply for a 
 grant under this section during the fiscal 
 year.
 ``(B) Nontraditional calendar.--The calculation of 
 the cost of tuition, fees, and on-campus room and board 
 under subparagraph (A) with respect to an eligible 
 student who applies for a grant under this section for 
 enrollment during the summer or other nontraditional 
 period shall be the cost of the cost of tuition, fees, 
 and on-campus room and board for such summer or other 
 nontraditional period.
 ``(4) Applications.--The Secretary shall design an 
 application for eligible institutions to participate in the 
 grant program under this subsection that includes a description 
 of how the eligible institution, if awarded a grant under this 
 subsection, will provide services to students as follows:
 ``(A) Provide comprehensive academic and student 
 support services for eligible students awarded grants 
 under this section, including mentoring and advising, 
 particularly for first-generation and minority 
 students.
 ``(B) Provide accelerated learning opportunities 
 for eligible students awarded grants under this section 
 to receive their baccalaureate degree and any required 
 certificate or license to work in their respective 
 public service job in less than 2 years if an eligible 
 student seeks to complete the degree in less than 2 
 years.
 ``(C) Foster opportunities for eligible students 
 awarded grants under this section to connect with 
 potential public service job employers through the 
 Corporation for National and Community Service.
 ``(D) Any additional information determined 
 necessary by the Secretary.
 ``(d) Grants to Eligible Students.--
 ``(1) In general.--Each eligible institution that receives 
 a grant under subsection (c) shall award grants to eligible 
 students enrolled at the institution.
 ``(2) Application.--An eligible student who desires to 
 receive a grant under this section shall submit an application 
 to the eligible institution that includes the following:
 ``(A) An agreement to work for not less than 3 
 years in a public service job upon completion of their 
 baccalaureate degree.
 ``(B) Information that demonstrates that the 
 student is an eligible student for purposes of section 
 484.
 ``(C) Information that demonstrates that the 
 student has received counseling from the Department 
 that explains the terms and conditions of the grant 
 award.
 ``(D) Any additional information determined 
 necessary by the Secretary.
 ``(3) Grant amount.--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (B), an eligible institution shall award a 
 grant to an eligible student enrolled at the 
 institution for an academic year in an amount equal to 
 the total grant amount received by the eligible 
 institution under subsection (c) for the fiscal year 
 preceding the academic year divided by the number of 
 students to whom the eligible institution awards grants 
 under this subsection for such academic year.
 ``(B) Nontraditional calendar.--An eligible 
 institution shall award a grant to an eligible student 
 who applies for a grant under this section for 
 enrollment during the summer or other nontraditional 
 period in an amount, from the total grant amount 
 received by the eligible institution under subsection 
 (c), that is prorated to reflect the cost of tuition, 
 fees, and on-campus room and board for such summer or 
 other nontraditional period.
 ``(4) Cost of attendance beyond grant amount.--
 ``(A) Amounts not covered by npseg grants.--
 ``(i) Public institutions.--
 ``(I) In general.--An eligible 
 institution that is a public 
 institution of higher education shall 
 cover the excess costs to meet the 
 difference between the in-State 
 tuition, fees, and on-campus room and 
 board at the institution and the amount 
 awarded to the eligible student through 
 the grant award under paragraph (3), 
 through a combination of grant and 
 work-study awards under this title for 
 which the eligible student may be 
 eligible, campus-based aid programs, 
 State-based merit or need-based aid, or 
 other institutional-based merit- or 
 need-based aid. An eligible institution 
 that is a public institution of higher 
 education may cover, with respect to an 
 eligible student, any amounts of the 
 cost of attendance that are in excess 
 of the total amount awarded to the 
 eligible student through the grant 
 award under paragraph (3) and the 
 amount of excess costs provided under 
 this subclause based on the 
 demonstrated financial need of the 
 student.
 ``(II) Student contribution.--The 
 eligible student shall be responsible 
 for any amounts of the cost of 
 attendance that are in excess of the 
 total amount awarded to the eligible 
 student through the grant award under 
 paragraph (3) and the amount of excess 
 costs provided under subclause (I). The 
 eligible student may be eligible for 
 Federal student aid in accordance with 
 subparagraph (B) for the remaining cost 
 of attendance amount for which the 
 student is responsible.
 ``(ii) Private institution.--
 ``(I) Matching amount.--
 ``(aa) In general.--An 
 eligible institution that is a 
 private, nonprofit institution 
 of higher education shall--

 ``(AA) with respect 
 to an eligible student 
 described in item (bb), 
 cover excess costs 
 toward meeting an 
 eligible student's cost 
 of attendance in an 
 amount equal to or 
 greater than the amount 
 of the grant award to 
 the eligible student 
 described in paragraph 
 (3); and

 ``(BB) with respect 
 to an eligible student 
 not described in item 
 (bb), not be obligated 
 to provide additional 
 institutional-based 
 financial aid to such 
 student.

 ``(bb) Eligible students.--
 An eligible student is 
 described in this item if the 
 student's (or the student's 
 parents' in the case of a 
 dependent student) adjusted 
 gross income for the taxable 
 year that is 1 year prior to 
 the taxable year that ends 
 immediately prior to the 
 beginning of the first award 
 year of the program under this 
 section is equal to or less 
 than $125,000, indexed for 
 inflation by regulation of the 
 Secretary.
 ``(cc) Source of aid.--The 
 required amount described in 
 item (aa)(AA) may be provided 
 through a combination of grant 
 and work-study awards under 
 this title for which the 
 eligible student may be 
 eligible, campus-based aid 
 programs, State-based merit or 
 need-based aid, or other 
 institutional-based merit- or 
 need-based aid.
 ``(II) Student contribution.--The 
 eligible student shall be responsible 
 for any amounts of the cost of 
 attendance that are in excess of the 
 total amount awarded to that eligible 
 student through the grant award under 
 paragraph (3) and the amount of excess 
 costs provided under subclause (I). The 
 eligible student may be eligible for 
 Federal student aid in accordance with 
 subparagraph (B) for the remaining cost 
 of attendance amount for which the 
 student is responsible.
 ``(iii) Student choice.--An eligible 
 student who receives a Federal work-study award 
 by an eligible institution to meet the cost of 
 attendance beyond a grant awarded under this 
 section may choose to decline the Federal work-
 study award and take out a Federal Direct 
 Unsubsidized Stafford Loan. An eligible 
 institution shall be considered to have met the 
 institution's responsibilities if a student 
 chooses to take out such a loan in lieu of a 
 Federal work-study award.
 ``(B) First dollar award.--An eligible institution 
 shall consider the grant award under this subsection as 
 the first dollar award, to be available prior to other 
 funds awarded by the Department of Education under this 
 title, the State involved, or the institution.
 ``(C) Housing.--An eligible student who receives a 
 grant under this subsection may use the grant amounts 
 for off-campus housing but the student may not use such 
 grant amounts for any amounts for such off-campus 
 housing that are in excess of the cost of on-campus 
 room and board.
 ``(5) Classes in nontraditional calendars.--An eligible 
 student who receives a grant under this subsection may use the 
 grant amounts for enrollment during any period of study.
 ``(e) Institutional Accountability.--
 ``(1) In general.--Each eligible institution that receives 
 a grant under subsection (c) shall--
 ``(A) provide comprehensive academic and student 
 support services for eligible students awarded grants 
 under this section, including mentoring and advising, 
 particularly for first-generation and minority 
 students;
 ``(B) provide accelerated learning opportunities 
 for eligible students awarded grants under this section 
 to receive their baccalaureate degree and any required 
 certificate or license to work in their respective 
 public service job in less than 2 years if an eligible 
 student seeks to complete the degree in less than 2 
 years; and
 ``(C) foster opportunities for eligible students 
 awarded grants under this section to connect with 
 potential public service job employers through the 
 Corporation for National and Community Service.
 ``(2) Biennial report.--
 ``(A) In general.--Each eligible institution that 
 receives a grant under subsection (c) shall submit a 
 biennial report to the Secretary describing the 
 following:
 ``(i) Academic and student support services 
 offered to eligible students awarded grants 
 under this section.
 ``(ii) Such students' progress towards 
 baccalaureate degree completion and graduation.
 ``(iii) Outreach to potential public 
 service job employers for the eligible students 
 awarded grants under this section.
 ``(B) Continuing grant awards to eligible 
 institutions.--The Secretary may continue grant awards 
 to an eligible institution under subsection (c) after 
 the initial 5-year grant period for additional 5-year 
 periods if--
 ``(i) the institution complies with the 
 requirements of paragraph (1); and
 ``(ii) the eligible students awarded grants 
 under this section who are enrolled at the 
 institution have a baccalaureate degree 
 graduation rate that meets or exceeds a rate 
 determined appropriate by the Secretary.
 ``(C) Discontinuing grant awards to eligible 
 institutions.--
 ``(i) In general.--The Secretary may 
 discontinue grant awards to an eligible 
 institution under subsection (c) after the 
 initial 5-year grant period based on the 
 outcome of the biennial reports under 
 subparagraph (A).
 ``(ii) Notification.--Prior to the 
 Secretary discontinuing a grant award under 
 clause (i), the Secretary shall notify the 
 institution, prior to the start of the 5th year 
 of the 5-year grant period, in a publically 
 available format, that the institution is, or 
 is potentially, out of compliance with the 
 requirements of the grant award and may have 
 the institution's grant awards discontinued.
 ``(iii) Modifications.--In the 5th year of 
 the 5-year grant period, an eligible 
 institution may make modifications to the 
 institution's grant program and appeal to the 
 Secretary for a renewal of the institution's 
 grant.
 ``(iv) Decision.--The Secretary, prior to 
 the conclusion of the 5-year grant period, 
 shall render a decision on whether to continue 
 grant awards to an eligible institution.
 ``(v) Remaining responsibility.--If the 
 Secretary discontinues grant awards to an 
 eligible institution under subsection (c), the 
 institution shall be responsible for 
 maintaining academic and student support 
 services and providing the full remaining costs 
 for eligible students awarded a grant under 
 this section prior to such discontinuation to 
 receive their baccalaureate degree debt free.
 ``(3) Institutional prohibitions.--Each eligible 
 institution that receives a grant under subsection (c) may 
 not--
 ``(A) use grant funds for administrative purposes; 
 or
 ``(B) establish different tuition prices between 
 eligible students who receive grants under this section 
 and students who do not receive grants under this 
 section for pursing the same course of study.
 ``(f) Student Accountability.--
 ``(1) Enrollment; gpa; service.--
 ``(A) In general.--An eligible student awarded a 
 grant under this section shall--
 ``(i) maintain full-time enrollment in 
 order to complete the student's baccalaureate 
 degree in not more than 2 years; and
 ``(ii) maintain satisfactory academic 
 progress, defined as a 3.0 grade point average 
 (GPA) or higher, and meet all other 
 institutional standards for academic progress.
 ``(B) Two weeks of service.--
 ``(i) In general.--Except as otherwise 
 provided in this subparagraph, an eligible 
 student awarded a grant under this section 
 shall serve for 80 hours as a participant in a 
 Corporation for National and Community Service 
 national service project for each year the 
 eligible student receives the grant. The 
 eligible institution shall assist in placing 
 the eligible student in such a project relevant 
 to the eligible student's course of study. Such 
 required hours may be completed at any point 
 during the student's enrollment but shall be 
 completed prior to the date the eligible 
 student receives the student's baccalaureate 
 degree.
 ``(ii) Other project.--If an eligible 
 student resides in an area without a local 
 Corporation for National and Community Service 
 national service project available, the student 
 may instead participate in a service project 
 with a community action agency, a local 
 government agency, or an organization described 
 in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue 
 Code of 1986.
 ``(iii) Medical exemption.--The Secretary 
 may grant an eligible student a medical 
 exemption from the service commitment under 
 this subparagraph if the student becomes 
 medically unable to complete the service 
 commitment over the course of the academic 
 year. An eligible student granted such an 
 exemption shall complete the service commitment 
 upon recovery without risking eligibility 
 status in the grant program under this section.
 ``(2) Satisfactory progress.--
 ``(A) After one year.--In the case in which an 
 eligible student awarded a grant under this section 
 does not maintain satisfactory academic progress, as 
 described in paragraph (1)(A)(ii), after the first 
 academic year for which the student received the grant, 
 the student shall--
 ``(i) serve an additional year in a public 
 service job beyond the 3-year commitment upon 
 receiving the student's baccalaureate degree; 
 and
 ``(ii) receive additional academic supports 
 from the eligible institution in which the 
 student is enrolled.
 ``(B) After two years.--In the case in which an 
 eligible student awarded a grant under this section 
 does not receive a baccalaureate degree after the 
 second academic year for which the student received the 
 grant, the total of the grant award amount and 
 remaining funds provided by the institution shall be 
 treated as a Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loan 
 under part D of title IV, and shall be subject to 
 repayment, as described in paragraph (4).
 ``(C) Appeals.--In the case in which an eligible 
 student awarded a grant under this section does not 
 maintain satisfactory academic progress, as described 
 in paragraph (1)(A)(ii), after the first academic year 
 for which the student received the grant, the student 
 may appeal the decision to serve an additional year, as 
 described in subparagraph (A)(i). The appeal shall be 
 made in writing to the eligible institution and include 
 an academic plan approved by the student's adviser. The 
 academic plan shall show a clear pathway to graduation 
 within 1 year.
 ``(3) Public service job work obligation.--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph 
 (2)(A)(i) and subparagraph (C), an eligible student 
 awarded a grant under this section shall work for not 
 less than 3 years in a public service job after 
 receiving the student's baccalaureate degree. Such 3 
 years (or 4 years, in the case of a scenario described 
 in paragraph (2)(A)(i)) may be consecutive or 
 nonconsecutive but shall be completed not later than 5 
 years (or 6 years, in the case of a scenario described 
 in paragraph (2)(A)(i)) after the date the student 
 receives the student's baccalaureate degree.
 ``(B) Notification.--An eligible student awarded a 
 grant under this section shall notify the Department, 
 utilizing a form designed by the Secretary, of the 
 student's compliance or noncompliance with subparagraph 
 (A) annually until such student completes the student's 
 work obligation.
 ``(C) Deferment for graduate school.--The work 
 obligation described in subparagraph (A) of an eligible 
 student awarded a grant under this section who enrolls 
 as a full-time student in a post-baccalaureate degree 
 program not later than 3 years after the date the 
 student receives the student's baccalaureate degree 
 shall be deferred during the period of such full-time 
 enrollment. Any years of service completed prior to 
 full-time enrollment in a post-baccalaureate degree 
 program shall count toward such work obligation.
 ``(4) Repayment for noncompliance.--In the event that an 
 eligible student awarded a grant under this section fails or 
 refuses to comply with the work obligation as described in 
 paragraph (3), or the student does not receive a baccalaureate 
 degree after the second academic year for which the student 
 received the grant, as described in paragraph (2)(B), the sum 
 of the amounts of any grants received by the student shall, 
 upon a determination of such a failure or refusal in such 
 service obligation or failure to receive a baccalaureate 
 degree, be treated as a Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford 
 Loan under part D of title IV, and shall be subject to 
 repayment, together with interest thereon accruing from the 
 date of the grant award, in accordance with terms and 
 conditions specified by the Secretary in regulations under this 
 section.
 ``(5) Medical exemption.--The Secretary may grant an 
 eligible student awarded a grant under this section a medical 
 exemption--
 ``(A) from the requirement of maintaining 
 satisfactory academic progress under paragraph 
 (1)(A)(ii); or
 ``(B) from a term or condition of the work 
 obligation of the student if the student becomes 
 medically unable to complete the student's studies or 
 public service job work obligation.

``SEC. 420U. NATIONAL PUBLIC SERVICE EDUCATION GRANT PROGRAM FOR 
 MINORITY-SERVING INSTITUTIONS AND HBCUS.

 ``(a) Definitions.--In this section:
 ``(1) Eligible institution.--The term `eligible 
 institution' means a minority-serving institution or 
 historically black college or university that is a public 4-
 year institution of higher education or a private, nonprofit 4-
 year institution of higher education.
 ``(2) Eligible student.--The term `eligible student' means 
 a student who--
 ``(A) has received an associate's degree or has 
 earned not less than 60 credits toward a baccalaureate 
 degree;
 ``(B) is enrolled, at an eligible institution 
 awarded a grant under this section, on a full-time 
 basis in a course of study that will lead to employment 
 in a public service job; and
 ``(C) has submitted a Free Application for Federal 
 Student Aid (FAFSA) to the Department.
 ``(3) Historically black college or university.--The term 
 `historically black college or university' means a part B 
 institution described in section 322(2).
 ``(4) Minority-serving institution.--The term `minority-
 serving institution' means any public or nonprofit institution 
 of higher education--
 ``(A) described in paragraphs (2) through (7) of 
 section 371(a); and
 ``(B) designated as a minority-serving institution 
 by the Secretary.
 ``(5) On-campus room and board.--The term `on-campus room 
 and board' means--
 ``(A) the cost to a student of a double room on 
 campus; and
 ``(B) the cost of a resident student meal plan.
 ``(6) Public service job.--The term `public service job' 
 has the meaning given the term in section 455(m)(3)(B).
 ``(b) Establishment of Program.--The Secretary shall establish a 
National Public Service Education Grant program for eligible 
institutions to provide a debt-free undergraduate education to students 
who commit to work for not less than 3 years in a public service job 
upon completion of their baccalaureate degree.
 ``(c) Grants From the Department to Eligible Institutions.--
 ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall award grants to 
 eligible institutions to enable the eligible institutions to 
 award grants to eligible students who commit to work for not 
 less than 3 years in a public service job upon completion of 
 their baccalaureate degree.
 ``(2) Duration.--Grants awarded to eligible institutions 
 under this subsection shall be 5 years in duration. Subject to 
 subsection (e), such a grant may be extended for additional 5-
 year periods.
 ``(3) Amounts.--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in 
 subparagraph (B), the Secretary shall award a grant to 
 an eligible institution under this subsection for a 
 fiscal year in an amount equal to the actual annual 
 cost of in-State tuition, fees, and on-campus room and 
 board at the eligible institution during the fiscal 
 year multiplied by the number of eligible students 
 enrolled at the institution who apply for a grant under 
 this section during the fiscal year.
 ``(B) Nontraditional calendar.--The calculation of 
 the cost of tuition, fees, and on-campus room and board 
 under subparagraph (A) with respect to an eligible 
 student who applies for a grant under this section for 
 enrollment during the summer or other nontraditional 
 period shall be the cost of the cost of tuition, fees, 
 and on-campus room and board for such summer or other 
 nontraditional period.
 ``(4) Applications.--The Secretary shall design an 
 application for eligible institutions to participate in the 
 grant program under this subsection that includes a description 
 of how the eligible institution, if awarded a grant under this 
 subsection, will provide services to students as follows:
 ``(A) Provide comprehensive academic and student 
 support services for eligible students awarded grants 
 under this section, including mentoring and advising, 
 particularly for first-generation and minority 
 students.
 ``(B) Provide accelerated learning opportunities 
 for eligible students awarded grants under this section 
 to receive their baccalaureate degree and any required 
 certificate or license to work in their respective 
 public service job in less than 2 years if an eligible 
 student seeks to complete the degree in less than 2 
 years.
 ``(C) Foster opportunities for eligible students 
 awarded grants under this section to connect with 
 potential public service job employers through the 
 Corporation for National and Community Service.
 ``(D) Any additional information determined 
 necessary by the Secretary.
 ``(d) Grants to Eligible Students.--
 ``(1) In general.--Each eligible institution that receives 
 a grant under subsection (c) shall award grants to eligible 
 students enrolled at the institution.
 ``(2) Application.--An eligible student who desires to 
 receive a grant under this section shall submit an application 
 to the eligible institution that includes the following:
 ``(A) An agreement to work for not less than 3 
 years in a public service job upon completion of their 
 baccalaureate degree.
 ``(B) Information that demonstrates that the 
 student is an eligible student for purposes of section 
 484.
 ``(C) Information that demonstrates that the 
 student has received counseling from the Department 
 that explains the terms and conditions of the grant 
 award.
 ``(D) Any additional information determined 
 necessary by the Secretary.
 ``(3) Grant amount.--
 ``(A) In general.--An eligible institution shall 
 award a grant to an eligible student enrolled at the 
 institution for an academic year in an amount equal to 
 the total grant amount received by the eligible 
 institution under subsection (c) for the fiscal year 
 preceding the academic year divided by the number of 
 students to whom the eligible institution awards grants 
 under this subsection for such academic year.
 ``(B) Nontraditional calendar.--An eligible 
 institution shall award a grant to an eligible student 
 who applies for a grant under this section for 
 enrollment during the summer or other nontraditional 
 period in an amount, from the total grant amount 
 received by the eligible institution under subsection 
 (c), that is prorated to reflect the cost of tuition, 
 fees, and on-campus room and board for such summer or 
 other nontraditional period.
 ``(4) Cost of attendance beyond grant amount.--
 ``(A) Amounts not covered by npseg grants.--
 ``(i) Public institution.--An eligible 
 institution that is a public institution of 
 higher education may cover, with respect to an 
 eligible student, any amounts of the cost of 
 attendance that are in excess of the total 
 amount awarded to the eligible student through 
 the grant award under paragraph (3), based on 
 the demonstrated financial need of the student. 
 For the remaining costs, the eligible student 
 enrolled at an eligible institution that is a 
 public institution shall be responsible for any 
 amounts of the cost of attendance that are in 
 excess of the total amount awarded to that 
 eligible student through the grant award under 
 paragraph (3) and any amount provided pursuant 
 to the preceding sentence. The eligible student 
 may be eligible for Federal student aid in 
 accordance with subparagraph (B) for the 
 remaining cost of attendance amount for which 
 the student is responsible.
 ``(ii) Private institution.--
 ``(I) In general.--An eligible 
 institution that is a private, 
 nonprofit institution of higher 
 education shall--
 ``(aa) with respect to an 
 eligible student described in 
 subclause (II), cover excess 
 costs toward meeting an 
 eligible student's cost of 
 attendance in an amount equal 
 to or greater than the amount 
 of the grant award to the 
 eligible student described in 
 paragraph (3); and
 ``(bb) with respect to an 
 eligible student not described 
 in subclause (II), not be 
 obligated to provide additional 
 institutional-based financial 
 aid to such student.
 ``(II) Eligible students.--An 
 eligible student is described in this 
 subclause if the student's (or the 
 student's parents' in the case of a 
 dependent student) adjusted gross 
 income for the taxable year that is 1 
 year prior to the taxable year that 
 ends immediately prior to the beginning 
 of the first award year of the program 
 under this section is equal to or less 
 than $125,000, indexed for inflation by 
 regulation of the Secretary.
 ``(III) Source of aid.--The 
 required amount described in subclause 
 (I)(aa) may be provided through a 
 combination of grant and work-study 
 awards under this title for which the 
 eligible student may be eligible, 
 campus-based aid programs, State-based 
 merit or need-based aid, or other 
 institutional-based merit- or need-
 based aid.
 ``(IV) Student contribution.--The 
 eligible student shall be responsible 
 for any amounts of the cost of 
 attendance that are in excess of the 
 total amount awarded to that eligible 
 student through the grant award under 
 paragraph (3) and the amount of excess 
 costs provided under subclause (I). The 
 eligible student may be eligible for 
 Federal student aid in accordance with 
 subparagraph (B) for the remaining cost 
 of attendance amount for which the 
 student is responsible.
 ``(iii) Student choice.--An eligible 
 student who receives a Federal work-study award 
 by an eligible institution to meet the cost of 
 attendance beyond a grant awarded under this 
 section may choose to decline the Federal work-
 study award and take out a Federal Direct 
 Unsubsidized Stafford Loan. An eligible 
 institution shall be considered to have met the 
 institution's responsibilities if a student 
 chooses to take out such a loan in lieu of a 
 Federal work-study award.
 ``(B) First dollar award.--In calculating an 
 eligible student's financial need to cover excess costs 
 described in subparagraph (A), the eligible institution 
 shall consider the grant award under this subsection as 
 the first dollar award, to be available prior to other 
 funds awarded by the Department of Education under this 
 title, the State involved, or the institution. If a 
 grant awarded to an eligible student under this section 
 is equal to the cost of tuition, fees, and on-campus 
 room and board for such student, the eligible 
 institution shall not be required to provide additional 
 institutional scholarship or grant based aid to the 
 eligible student.
 ``(C) Housing.--An eligible student who receives a 
 grant under this subsection may use the grant amounts 
 for off-campus housing but the student may not use such 
 grant amounts for any amounts for such off-campus 
 housing that are in excess of the cost of on-campus 
 room and board.
 ``(5) Classes in nontraditional calendars.--An eligible 
 student who receives a grant under this subsection may use the 
 grant amounts for enrollment during any period of study.
 ``(e) Institutional Accountability.--
 ``(1) In general.--Each eligible institution that receives 
 a grant under subsection (c) shall--
 ``(A) provide comprehensive academic and student 
 support services for eligible students awarded grants 
 under this section, including mentoring and advising, 
 particularly for first-generation and minority 
 students;
 ``(B) provide accelerated learning opportunities 
 for eligible students awarded grants under this section 
 to receive their baccalaureate degree and any required 
 certificate or license to work in their respective 
 public service job in less than 2 years if an eligible 
 student seeks to complete the degree in less than 2 
 years; and
 ``(C) foster opportunities for eligible students 
 awarded grants under this section to connect with 
 potential public service job employers through the 
 Corporation for National and Community Service.
 ``(2) Biennial report.--
 ``(A) In general.--Each eligible institution that 
 receives a grant under subsection (c) shall submit a 
 biennial report to the Secretary describing the 
 following:
 ``(i) Academic and student support services 
 offered to eligible students awarded grants 
 under this section.
 ``(ii) Such students' progress towards 
 baccalaureate degree completion and graduation.
 ``(iii) Outreach to potential public 
 service job employers for the eligible students 
 awarded grants under this section.
 ``(B) Continuing grant awards to eligible 
 institutions.--The Secretary may continue grant awards 
 to an eligible institution under subsection (c) after 
 the initial 5-year grant period for additional 5-year 
 periods if--
 ``(i) the institution complies with the 
 requirements of paragraph (1); and
 ``(ii) the eligible students awarded grants 
 under this section who are enrolled at the 
 institution have a baccalaureate degree 
 graduation rate that meets or exceeds a rate 
 determined appropriate by the Secretary.
 ``(C) Discontinuing grant awards to eligible 
 institutions.--
 ``(i) In general.--The Secretary may 
 discontinue grant awards to an eligible 
 institution under subsection (c) after the 
 initial 5-year grant period based on the 
 outcome of the biennial reports under 
 subparagraph (A).
 ``(ii) Notification.--Prior to the 
 Secretary discontinuing a grant award under 
 clause (i), the Secretary shall notify the 
 institution, prior to the start of the 5th year 
 of the 5-year grant period, in a publically 
 available format, that the institution is, or 
 is potentially, out of compliance with the 
 requirements of the grant award and may have 
 the institution's grant awards discontinued.
 ``(iii) Modifications.--In the 5th year of 
 the 5-year grant period, an eligible 
 institution may make modifications to the 
 institution's grant program and appeal to the 
 Secretary for a renewal of the institution's 
 grant.
 ``(iv) Decision.--The Secretary, prior to 
 the conclusion of the 5-year grant period, 
 shall render a decision on whether to continue 
 grant awards to an eligible institution.
 ``(v) Remaining responsibility.--If the 
 Secretary discontinues grant awards to an 
 eligible institution under subsection (c), the 
 institution shall be responsible for 
 maintaining academic and student support 
 services and providing the full remaining costs 
 for eligible students awarded a grant under 
 this section prior to such discontinuation to 
 receive their baccalaureate degree debt free.
 ``(3) Institutional prohibitions.--Each eligible 
 institution that receives a grant under subsection (c) may 
 not--
 ``(A) use grant funds for administrative purposes; 
 or
 ``(B) establish different tuition prices between 
 eligible students who receive grants under this section 
 and students who do not receive grants under this 
 section for pursing the same course of study.
 ``(f) Student Accountability.--
 ``(1) Enrollment; gpa; service.--
 ``(A) In general.--An eligible student awarded a 
 grant under this section shall--
 ``(i) maintain full-time enrollment in 
 order to complete the student's baccalaureate 
 degree in not more than 2 years; and
 ``(ii) maintain satisfactory academic 
 progress, defined as a 3.0 grade point average 
 (GPA) or higher, and meet all other 
 institutional standards for academic progress.
 ``(B) Two weeks of service.--
 ``(i) In general.--Except as otherwise 
 provided in this subparagraph, an eligible 
 student awarded a grant under this section 
 shall serve for 80 hours as a participant in a 
 Corporation for National and Community Service 
 national service project for each year the 
 eligible student receives the grant. The 
 eligible institution shall assist in placing 
 the eligible student in such a project relevant 
 to the eligible student's course of study. Such 
 required hours may be completed at any point 
 during the student's enrollment but shall be 
 completed prior to the date the eligible 
 student receives the student's baccalaureate 
 degree.
 ``(ii) Other project.--If an eligible 
 student resides in an area without a local 
 Corporation for National and Community Service 
 national service project available, the student 
 may instead participate in a service project 
 with a community action agency, a local 
 government agency, or an organization described 
 in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue 
 Code of 1986.
 ``(iii) Medical exemption.--The Secretary 
 may grant an eligible student a medical 
 exemption from the service commitment under 
 this subparagraph if the student becomes 
 medically unable to complete the service 
 commitment over the course of the academic 
 year. An eligible student granted such an 
 exemption shall complete the service commitment 
 upon recovery without risking eligibility 
 status in the grant program under this section.
 ``(2) Satisfactory progress.--
 ``(A) After one year.--In the case in which an 
 eligible student awarded a grant under this section 
 does not maintain satisfactory academic progress, as 
 described in paragraph (1)(A)(ii), after the first 
 academic year for which the student received the grant, 
 the student shall--
 ``(i) serve an additional year in a public 
 service job beyond the 3-year commitment upon 
 receiving the student's baccalaureate degree; 
 and
 ``(ii) receive additional academic supports 
 from the eligible institution in which the 
 student is enrolled.
 ``(B) After two years.--In the case in which an 
 eligible student awarded a grant under this section 
 does not receive a baccalaureate degree after the 
 second academic year for which the student received the 
 grant, the total of the grant award amount and 
 remaining funds provided by the institution shall be 
 treated as a Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loan 
 under part D of title IV, and shall be subject to 
 repayment, as described in paragraph (4).
 ``(C) Appeals.--In the case in which an eligible 
 student awarded a grant under this section does not 
 maintain satisfactory academic progress, as described 
 in paragraph (1)(A)(ii), after the first academic year 
 for which the student received the grant, the student 
 may appeal the decision to serve an additional year, as 
 described in subparagraph (A)(i). The appeal shall be 
 made in writing to the eligible institution and include 
 an academic plan approved by the student's adviser. The 
 academic plan shall show a clear pathway to graduation 
 within 1 year.
 ``(3) Public service job work obligation.--
 ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph 
 (2)(A)(i) and subparagraph (C), an eligible student 
 awarded a grant under this section shall work for not 
 less than 3 years in a public service job after 
 receiving the student's baccalaureate degree. Such 3 
 years (or 4 years, in the case of a scenario described 
 in paragraph (2)(A)(i)) may be consecutive or 
 nonconsecutive but shall be completed not later than 5 
 years (or 6 years, in the case of a scenario described 
 in paragraph (2)(A)(i)) after the date the student 
 receives the student's baccalaureate degree.
 ``(B) Notification.--An eligible student awarded a 
 grant under this section shall notify the Department, 
 utilizing a form designed by the Secretary, of the 
 student's compliance or noncompliance with subparagraph 
 (A) annually until such student completes the student's 
 work obligation.
 ``(C) Deferment for graduate school.--The work 
 obligation described in subparagraph (A) of an eligible 
 student awarded a grant under this section who enrolls 
 as a full-time student in a post-baccalaureate degree 
 program not later than 3 years after the date the 
 student receives the student's baccalaureate degree 
 shall be deferred during the period of such full-time 
 enrollment. Any years of service completed prior to 
 full-time enrollment in a post-baccalaureate degree 
 program shall count toward such work obligation.
 ``(4) Repayment for noncompliance.--In the event that an 
 eligible student awarded a grant under this section fails or 
 refuses to comply with the work obligation as described in 
 paragraph (3), or the student does not receive a baccalaureate 
 degree after the second academic year for which the student 
 received the grant, as described in paragraph (2)(B), the sum 
 of the amounts of any grants received by the student shall, 
 upon a determination of such a failure or refusal in such 
 service obligation or failure to meet satisfactory academic 
 progress, be treated as a Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford 
 Loan under part D of title IV, and shall be subject to 
 repayment, together with interest thereon accruing from the 
 date of the grant award, in accordance with terms and 
 conditions specified by the Secretary in regulations under this 
 section.
 ``(5) Medical exemption.--The Secretary may grant an 
 eligible student awarded a grant under this section a medical 
 exemption--
 ``(A) from the requirement of maintaining 
 satisfactory academic progress under paragraph 
 (1)(A)(ii); or
 ``(B) from a term or condition of the work 
 obligation of the student if the student becomes 
 medically unable to complete the student's studies or 
 public service job work obligation.''.

 TITLE III--DEBT-FREE PUBLIC SERVICE LOAN FORGIVENESS PROGRAM

SEC. 301. DEBT-FREE PUBLIC SERVICE LOAN FORGIVENESS PROGRAM.

 (a) In General.--Section 455(m) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 
(20 U.S.C. 1087e(m)) is amended by adding at the end the following:
 ``(5) Debt-free public service loan forgiveness program.--
 ``(A) In general.--Beginning after the date of 
 enactment of the Strengthening American Communities Act 
 of 2018, after the conclusion of each employment period 
 in a public service job, as described in subparagraph 
 (B), the Secretary shall cancel the percent specified 
 in such subparagraph of the total amount due on any 
 eligible Federal Direct Loan made after the date of 
 enactment of the Strengthening American Communities Act 
 of 2018 for a borrower who--
 ``(i) is employed in such public service 
 job;
 ``(ii) submits an employment certification 
 form described in subparagraph (C);
 ``(iii) is enrolled in a repayment plan 
 described in paragraph (1)(A); and
 ``(iv) notifies the Department that the 
 borrower seeks loan cancellation under this 
 paragraph.
 ``(B) Percent amount.--The percent of a loan that 
 shall be canceled under subparagraph (A) is as follows:
 ``(i) In the case of a borrower who 
 completes 2 years of employment in a public 
 service job, 15 percent of the total amount due 
 on the eligible Federal Direct Loan on the date 
 the borrower commenced employment in such 
 public service job.
 ``(ii) In the case of a borrower who 
 completes 4 years of employment in a public 
 service job, 15 percent of the total amount due 
 on the eligible Federal Direct Loan on the date 
 the borrower commenced employment in such 
 public service job.
 ``(iii) In the case of a borrower who 
 completes 6 years of employment in a public 
 service job, 20 percent of the total amount due 
 on the eligible Federal Direct Loan on the date 
 the borrower commenced employment in such 
 public service job.
 ``(iv) In the case of a borrower who 
 completes 8 years of employment in a public 
 service job, 20 percent of the total amount due 
 on the eligible Federal Direct Loan on the date 
 the borrower commenced employment in such 
 public service job.
 ``(v) In the case of a borrower who 
 completes 10 years of employment in a public 
 service job, 30 percent of the total amount due 
 on the eligible Federal Direct Loan on the date 
 the borrower commenced employment in such 
 public service job.
 ``(C) Employment certification form.--
 ``(i) In general.--In order to receive loan 
 cancellation under this paragraph, a borrower 
 shall submit to the Secretary an employment 
 certification form that is developed by the 
 Secretary and includes at least self-
 certification of employment, a separate part 
 for employer certification that indicates the 
 dates of employment, and any additional 
 information required by the Secretary.
 ``(ii) Deferment.--If a borrower submits to 
 the Secretary the employment certification form 
 described in clause (i), during the period in 
 which the borrower is employed in a public 
 service job for which loan cancellation is 
 eligible under this paragraph, the borrower's 
 eligible Federal Direct Loan shall be placed in 
 deferment.
 ``(D) Interest canceled.--If a portion of a loan is 
 canceled under this paragraph for any year, the entire 
 amount of interest on such loan that accrues for such 
 year shall be canceled.
 ``(E) No retroactivity.--A borrower may not receive 
 credit for purposes of loan forgiveness under this 
 paragraph for years of employment in a public service 
 job that occurred before the date of enactment of the 
 Strengthening American Communities Act of 2018.
 ``(F) Leaving public service.--
 ``(i) In general.--If a borrower who 
 receives loan cancellation under this paragraph 
 leaves the public service job, either 
 voluntarily or involuntarily, for which the 
 borrower received loan cancellation before the 
 total amount due on the eligible Federal Direct 
 Loan is cancelled under this paragraph, such 
 borrower shall retain eligibility for 
 accelerated loan cancellation under this 
 paragraph for such eligible Federal Direct Loan 
 if the borrower commences employment in a 
 public service job not later than 3 years after 
 the date the borrower left the public service 
 job for which the borrower received loan 
 cancellation.
 ``(ii) Eligibility status.--If a borrower 
 described in clause (i) commences employment in 
 a public service job within the time period 
 described in clause (i), such borrower shall 
 resume eligibility for accelerated loan 
 cancellation under this paragraph for such 
 eligible Federal Direct Loan. Such borrower 
 upon resumption of eligibility shall be 
 considered to have completed the number of 
 years of employment in a public service job at 
 the last completed loan cancellation period 
 described in subparagraph (B) for such 
 borrower, even if the borrower had actually 
 completed an additional year of employment in a 
 public service job.
 ``(iii) Loss of eligibility.--If a borrower 
 described in clause (i) does not commence 
 employment in a public service job within the 
 time period described in clause (i), such 
 borrower shall no longer be eligible for loan 
 cancellation under this paragraph but may be 
 eligible for loan cancellation for such loan 
 under paragraph (1).''.
 (b) Notification of Program.--The Secretary of Education, in order 
to inform public servants of the benefits of the debt-free public 
service loan cancellation program established under section 455(m)(5) 
of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. 1087e(m))--
 (1) shall make guidance publicly available to the employers 
 of public servants to make public servants aware of such 
 program; and
 (2) is encouraged to work in partnership with State 
 licensing agencies to make recently licensed public servants 
 aware of such program.
 <all>