[Congressional Bills 111th Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]
[H.R. 2989 Reported in House (RH)]

 Union Calendar No. 289
111th CONGRESS
 2d Session
 H. R. 2989

 [Report No. 111-244, Part I]

To amend the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 to provide 
special reporting and disclosure rules for individual account plans and 
 to provide a minimum investment option requirement for such plans, to 
 amend such Act to provide for independent investment advice for 
 participants and beneficiaries under individual account plans, and to 
 amend such Act and the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to provide 
 transitional relief under certain pension funding rules added by the 
 Pension Protection Act of 2006.

_______________________________________________________________________

 IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

 June 23, 2009

 Mr. George Miller of California (for himself and Mr. Andrews) 
 introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee on 
 Education and Labor, and in addition to the Committee on Ways and 
 Means, for a period to be subsequently determined by the Speaker, in 
 each case for consideration of such provisions as fall within the 
 jurisdiction of the committee concerned

 July 31, 2009

 Reported from the Committee on Education and Labor with an amendment
 [Strike out all after the enacting clause and insert the part printed 
 in italic]

 July 31, 2009

 Referral to the Committee on Ways and Means extended for a period 
 ending not later than October 16, 2009

 October 16, 2009

 Referral to the Committee on Ways and Means extended for a period 
 ending not later than Novermber 13, 2009

 November 13, 2009

 Referral to the Committee on Ways and Means extended for a period 
 ending not later than December 11, 2009

 December 11, 2009

 Referral to the Committee on Ways and Means extended for a period 
 ending not later than January 19, 2010

 January 19, 2010

 Referral to the Committee on Ways and Means extended for a period 
 ending not later than February 26, 2010

 February 26, 2010

 Referral to the Committee on Ways and Means extended for a period 
 ending not later than March 26, 2010

 March 26, 2010

 Referral to the Committee on Ways and Means extended for a period 
 ending not later than April 30, 2010

 April 30, 2010

 Referral to the Committee on Ways and Means extended for a period 
 ending not later than May 28, 2010

 May 28, 2010

 Additional sponsor: Mr. McDermott

 May 28, 2010

 Committee on Ways and Means discharged; committed to the Committee of 
 the Whole House on the State of the Union and ordered to be printed
 [For text of introduced bill, see copy of bill as introduced on June 
 23, 2009]

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

To amend the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 to provide 
special reporting and disclosure rules for individual account plans and 
 to provide a minimum investment option requirement for such plans, to 
 amend such Act to provide for independent investment advice for 
 participants and beneficiaries under individual account plans, and to 
 amend such Act and the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to provide 
 transitional relief under certain pension funding rules added by the 
 Pension Protection Act of 2006.

 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the 
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE AND TABLE OF CONTENTS.

 (a) Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``401(k) Fair 
Disclosure and Pension Security Act of 2009''.
 (b) Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as 
follows:

Sec. 1. Short title and table of contents.

 TITLE I--401(k) FAIR DISCLOSURE FOR RETIREMENT

Sec. 101. Special reporting and disclosure rules for individual account 
 plans.
Sec. 102. Minimum investment option requirement for individual account 
 plans.
Sec. 103. Enforcement coordination and review by the Department of 
 Labor.

 TITLE II--PROHIBITION OF CONFLICTED INVESTMENT ADVICE

Sec. 201. Findings.
Sec. 202. Independent investment advisers for individual account plans.
Sec. 203. Expansion of outreach to promote retirement income savings to 
 include promotion of education on financial 
 literacy with respect to investment for 
 retirement.

 TITLE III--TRANSITIONAL FUNDING RELIEF FOR DEFINED BENEFIT PLANS

Sec. 301. Election to use yield curve.
Sec. 302. Effective date of regulations.
Sec. 303. Clarification of treatment of expenses.
Sec. 304. Information reporting.
Sec. 305. 5-year extension of automatic amortization extension period 
 for multiemployer plans.
Sec. 306. Pension plan maintained by Christian Schools International 
 treated as church plan.
Sec. 307. Special rule for determining adequate consideration in 
 connection with the purchase and sale of 
 qualifying employer securities.
Sec. 308. Extended period for single-employer defined benefit plans to 
 amortize the shortfall amortization base 
 for 2009 and 2010.

 TITLE I--401(k) FAIR DISCLOSURE FOR RETIREMENT

SEC. 101. SPECIAL REPORTING AND DISCLOSURE RULES FOR INDIVIDUAL ACCOUNT 
 PLANS.

 (a) Additional Reporting and Disclosure Rules.--Part 1 of subtitle 
B of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 is 
amended--
 (1) by redesignating section 111 (29 U.S.C. 1031) as 
 section 112; and
 (2) by inserting after section 110 (29 U.S.C. 1030) the 
 following new section:

``SEC. 111. SPECIAL REPORTING AND DISCLOSURE RULES FOR INDIVIDUAL 
 ACCOUNT PLANS.

 ``(a) Disclosure to Employers Sponsoring Individual Account Plans 
Regarding Services Necessary for Establishment or Operation of Plans.--
 ``(1) Service disclosure statement.--The plan administrator 
 of an individual account plan (or any other plan official with 
 contracting authority under the terms of the plan) may not 
 enter into a contract or arrangement for services to the plan 
 (including, for purposes of this section, the offering of any 
 investment option to the plan) unless such plan administrator 
 or other official has received, reasonably in advance of 
 entering into the contract or arrangement, a single written 
 statement from the service provider which--
 ``(A) specifies such services for the plan that 
 will be provided in connection with the contract or 
 arrangement, and
 ``(B) provides the expected total annual charges 
 for such services for the plan that will be provided in 
 connection with the contract or arrangement, including 
 a reasonable allocation of such total annual charges 
 among all relevant component charges specified in 
 paragraph (2) (regardless of how the charges are 
 actually assessed).
 The description of the services and specification of the 
 charges for the services shall be displayed prominently in the 
 written statement and shall be presented in a format which is 
 understandable to the typical plan administrator.
 ``(2) Minimum allocation requirements.--The allocation 
 required under paragraph (1)(B) in connection with the services 
 provided under each contract or arrangement shall specify 
 component charges (to the extent such services for the plan are 
 provided under the contract or arrangement) as follows:
 ``(A) charges for administration and recordkeeping,
 ``(B) transaction based charges,
 ``(C) charges for investment management, and
 ``(D) all such charges not described in 
 subparagraph (A), (B), or (C).
 The Secretary may by regulation provide for the appropriate 
 allocation of component charges among the categories of charges 
 provided in subparagraphs (A), (B), (C), and (D).
 ``(3) Presentation of charges.--The total charges described 
 in paragraph (2)(A) and the total charges described in 
 paragraph (2)(C) shall each be presented in the written 
 statement as an aggregate total dollar amount, and, in 
 addition, each of such total charges may also be presented as a 
 percentage of assets. The charges described in paragraph (2)(B) 
 shall be itemized separately as dollar amounts or as 
 percentages of the applicable base amounts.
 ``(4) Estimations.--For purposes of providing the statement 
 required under this subsection in connection with any service, 
 the service provider may provide a reasonable and 
 representative estimate of the charges required to be specified 
 under paragraph (1)(B) and shall indicate any such estimate as 
 being such an estimate. Any such estimate shall be based on 
 reasonable assumptions specified in the statement (which shall 
 include the previous year's experience of the plan or, in the 
 case of a new plan, a reasonable estimate, taking into account 
 the plan's participants and beneficiaries).
 ``(5) Disclosure of financial relationships.--
 ``(A) In general.--The statement required under 
 paragraph (1) shall include a written disclosure of--
 ``(i) any payment to be provided (or the 
 amount representing the value of any services 
 to be provided) to the service provider (or any 
 affiliate thereof) from any entity other than 
 the plan or the accounts of participants or 
 beneficiaries pursuant to, or in connection 
 with, the contract or arrangement described in 
 paragraph (1) and the amount and type of any 
 payment to be made or credit to be received for 
 such services (irrespective of whether the 
 service provider (or affiliate thereof) or 
 other person providing such services is 
 affiliated or unaffiliated with the plan, the 
 plan sponsor, the plan administrator, or any 
 other plan official), and
 ``(ii) such other similar arrangements 
 benefitting the service provider (or any 
 affiliate thereof) as may be specified by the 
 Secretary.
 In any case in which the contract or arrangement 
 described in paragraph (1) provides for the payments 
 described in clause (i) in terms of a formula, the 
 requirements of such clause may be met by specifying 
 the formula to be used in connection with such payments 
 and describing the application of such formula.
 ``(B) Inclusions.--
 ``(i) In general.--Disclosures described 
 under subparagraph (A)(ii) shall include the 
 extent to which the service provider (or any 
 affiliate thereof) may benefit from the 
 offering of its own proprietary investment 
 products or those of third parties, including 
 (but not limited to) cross-selling of 
 affiliated products or services to the plan 
 sponsor or participants.
 ``(ii) Applicable prohibited transaction 
 exemption.--Disclosures under this paragraph 
 may include a description of any applicable 
 prohibited transaction exemption under section 
 408 related to the services described in the 
 statement required under paragraph (1).
 ``(6) Disclosure of impact of share classes.--The statement 
 required under paragraph (1) shall, to the extent applicable, 
 disclose that the share prices of certain mutual fund 
 investments that are available to the plan may be different 
 from the share prices outside of the plan due to the existence 
 of different share classes and provide the basis for these 
 differences.
 ``(7) Disclosure of certain arrangements in connection with 
 free or discounted services or reimbursements by service 
 providers.--In any case in which services are provided to the 
 plan, or to the plan sponsor in connection with the plan, by 
 any service provider without explicit charge or for charges set 
 at a discounted rate or subject to rebate, the statement 
 required under paragraph (1) shall specify the manner in which, 
 the extent to which, and the amount by which consideration is 
 otherwise obtained by the service provider (or any affiliate 
 thereof), the plan, or the plan sponsor for such services, 
 directly or indirectly, by means of any charges against the 
 plan.
 ``(8) Review by the secretary.--The Secretary shall, from 
 time to time as determined appropriate by the Secretary, review 
 the accuracy and sufficiency of statements provided pursuant to 
 this subsection.
 ``(9) Updating.--Each service provider shall provide to the 
 plan administrator an updated written statement described in 
 paragraph (1) describing any material change in the information 
 included in the statement provided pursuant to paragraph (1) as 
 soon as is reasonable after the occurrence of the change is 
 known. Such an updated written statement, or, in the case of a 
 plan year in which no material change in the information 
 included in the statement provided pursuant to paragraph (1) 
 has occurred, a written statement setting forth such fact, 
 shall be provided by the service provider not less often than 
 annually.
 ``(10) Limitations.--
 ``(A) Dollar limitation.--
 ``(i) In general.--The requirements of this 
 subsection shall apply with respect to any 
 contract or arrangement for services provided 
 during any plan year only if the total charged 
 for such services under such contract or 
 arrangement is reasonably expected to equal or 
 exceed $5,000.
 ``(ii) Adjustments by the secretary.--The 
 Secretary may be regulation adjust the dollar 
 amount specified in this subparagraph to a 
 lesser amount for small plans and to a greater 
 amount for other plans and provide for 
 appropriate annual adjustments in such adjusted 
 amounts
 ``(B) General applicability of requirements with 
 respect to services.--Nothing in this subsection shall 
 be construed to require any service provider to provide 
 any service with respect to any particular plan 
 sponsor.
 ``(11) Satisfaction of fiduciary rules.--Nothing in the 
 preceding provisions of this subsection affects the obligations 
 of fiduciaries under part 4 of this subtitle.
 ``(b) Disclosures to Participants and Beneficiaries.--
 ``(1) Advance notice of available investment options.--The 
 plan administrator of an individual account plan that permits 
 participants or beneficiaries to direct the investment of 
 assets in their individual accounts shall provide to the 
 participant or beneficiary notice of the investment options 
 available for election under the plan before a reasonable 
 period prior to--
 ``(A) the earliest date provided for under the plan 
 for the participant's initial investment of any 
 contribution made on behalf of such participant, and
 ``(B) the effective date of any material change in 
 investment options.
 In the case of a plan that provides for immediate eligibility 
 or that contains an automatic contribution arrangement (as 
 defined in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of section 514(e)(2)), the 
 notice required under subparagraph (A) may be provided within 
 any reasonable period prior to such initial investment. With 
 respect to any notice required under this paragraph, the 
 Secretary shall prescribe regulations creating specific 
 requirements for periods of advance notice to be treated as 
 reasonable under this paragraph (of not less than 10 days) in 
 circumstances similar to those described in section 
 101(i)(2)(C), and such notice may be combined with any similar 
 notice that may be required under section 404(c)(5) or under 
 this section.
 ``(2) Information included in notice.--The notice required 
 under paragraph (1) shall--
 ``(A) include a prominent statement, in language 
 presented in a manner which is easily understandable by 
 the typical participant, indicating which components of 
 the charges (both direct and indirect) for each 
 investment option are payable by the participant or 
 beneficiary and how such components are to be paid,
 ``(B) set forth, with respect to each available 
 investment option--
 ``(i) the name of the option,
 ``(ii) information effectively describing 
 the investment objectives of the option (such 
 as a description of a broadly recognized asset 
 class),
 ``(iii) the risk level associated with the 
 option,
 ``(iv) whether the option is diversified 
 among various classes of assets so as to 
 minimize the risk of large losses or should be 
 combined with other options so as to obtain 
 such diversification,
 ``(v) whether the investment option is 
 actively managed or passively managed in 
 relation to an index and the difference between 
 active management and passive management,
 ``(vi) where, and the manner in which, 
 additional plan-specific, option-specific, and 
 generally available investment information 
 regarding the option may be obtained, and
 ``(vii) a statement explaining that 
 investment options should not be evaluated 
 solely on the basis of the charges for each 
 option but should also be based on careful 
 consideration of other key factors, including 
 the risk level of the option, the investment 
 objectives of the option, the principal 
 investment strategies of the option, and 
 historical returns of the option, and
 ``(C) include a plan fee comparison chart, relating 
 to the charges described in paragraph (3) in connection 
 with all investment options available under the plan, 
 as provided in paragraph (3).
 ``(3) Plan fee comparison chart.--
 ``(A) In general.--
 ``(i) In general.--The notice provided 
 under this subsection shall include a plan fee 
 comparison chart consisting of a comparison of 
 actual service and investment charges 
 (including, for purposes of this clause, 
 charges for the offering of an investment 
 option) that will or could be assessed against 
 the account of the participant or beneficiary 
 with respect to the plan year. The plan fee 
 comparison chart shall be presented in a manner 
 which is easily understood by the typical 
 participant and include such information as the 
 Secretary determines necessary to permit 
 participants and beneficiaries to assess the 
 services for which charges will or could be 
 assessed against the account.
 ``(ii) Form.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph, the potential service charges shall 
 be provided in the form of a dollar amount or 
 as a formula (such as a percentage of assets), 
 as appropriate. The form of the potential 
 service charges shall be presented in a manner 
 which is easily understandable by the typical 
 participant, including examples that 
 demonstrate how the charges will be assessed 
 against the account of the participant or 
 beneficiary.
 ``(B) Categorization of charges.--The plan fee 
 comparison chart shall provide information in relation 
 to the following categories of charges that will or 
 could be assessed against the account of the 
 participant or beneficiary:
 ``(i) Asset-based charges specific to 
 investment.--Charges that vary depending on the 
 investment options selected by the participant 
 or beneficiary, including expense ratios and 
 investment-specific asset-based charges. The 
 information relating to such charges shall 
 include a statement noting any charges for 1 or 
 more investment options which pay for services 
 other than investment management.
 ``(ii) Asset-based charges not specific to 
 investment.--Charges that are assessed as a 
 percentage of the total assets in the account 
 of the participant or beneficiary, regardless 
 of the investment option selected.
 ``(iii) Administrative and transaction-
 based charges.--Administration and transaction-
 based charges, including fees charged to 
 participants to cover plan administration, 
 compliance, and recordkeeping costs, plan loan 
 origination fees, possible redemption fees, and 
 possible surrender charges, that are not 
 assessed as a percentage of the total assets in 
 the account and are either automatically 
 deducted each year or result from certain 
 transactions engaged in by the participant or 
 beneficiary.
 ``(iv) Other charges.--Any other charges 
 which may be deducted from participants' or 
 beneficiaries' accounts and which are not 
 described in clauses (i), (ii), and (iii).
 ``(C) Description of purpose for charges.--The 
 notice shall indicate the extent to which each charge 
 is for investment management, transactions, plan 
 administration and recordkeeping, or other identified 
 services.
 ``(D) Fees and historical returns.--In connection 
 with each investment option listed in the plan fee 
 comparison chart, the chart shall also include, as 
 determined periodically by the Secretary in 
 consultation with the Securities and Exchange 
 Commission, appropriate and consistent benchmarks, 
 indices, or other points of comparison that may be used 
 by beneficiaries to compare each investment option's 
 historical returns, net of fees and expenses, for the 
 previous year, 5 years, and 10 years (or for the period 
 since inception, if shorter) as shown in the chart 
 pursuant to this paragraph, including a separate point 
 of comparison with respect to each such time period.
 ``(4) Model notices.--The Secretary shall prescribe one or 
 more model notices that may be used for purposes of satisfying 
 the requirements of this subsection, including model plan fee 
 comparison charts.
 ``(5) Estimations.--For purposes of providing the notice 
 required under this subsection, the plan administrator may 
 provide a reasonable and representative estimate for any 
 charges or percentages disclosed under paragraph (2) or (3) and 
 shall indicate any such estimate as being such an estimate. Any 
 such estimate shall be based on reasonable assumptions stated 
 in the notice (such as the previous year's experience or, in 
 the case of a new plan, a reasonable estimate, taking into 
 account the plan's participants and beneficiaries).
 ``(c) Electronic Media.--Any disclosure required under this section 
may be provided through an electronic medium under such rules as shall 
be prescribed by the Secretary not later than 1 year after the date of 
the enactment of the 401(k) Fair Disclosure and Pension Security Act of 
2009. Such rules shall be similar to those applicable under the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 with respect to notices to participants 
in pension plans. The Secretary shall regularly modify such rules as 
appropriate to take into account new developments, including new forms 
of electronic media, and to fairly take into consideration the 
interests of plan sponsors, service providers, and participants. The 
rules prescribed by the Secretary pursuant to this subsection shall 
provide for a method for the typical participant or beneficiary to 
obtain without undue burden any such disclosure in writing on paper in 
lieu of receipt through an electronic medium.
 ``(d) Regulations Regarding Certain Products.--The Secretary may by 
regulation identify certain types of investment options, such as an 
option that provides a guaranteed rate of return and that does not 
identify specific fees, and prescribe alternative disclosures of cost 
and performance measures that correspond to the particular 
circumstances of such options.
 ``(e) Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Charge.--The term `charge' means, in connection with 
 any service provided to a plan or any financial product 
 provided to the plan in which plan assets are to be invested, 
 any fee, credit, or other compensation charged or paid for such 
 service or product, including money and any other thing of 
 monetary value to be received by the provider of the service or 
 product, or its affiliate, in connection with the service or 
 product.
 ``(2) Service.--The term `service' means, in connection 
 with a plan, a service provided directly or indirectly to, or 
 with respect to, the plan or a service provided directly or 
 indirectly in connection with a financial product in which plan 
 assets are to be invested.
 ``(3) Contract or arrangement.--The term `contract or 
 arrangement' means, in connection with any 2 or more parties, 
 any contract or arrangement entered into between or among such 
 parties, and any extension or renewal thereof.
 ``(4) Service provider.--The terms `service provider' and 
 `provider' mean, in connection with a service, a person 
 directly or indirectly providing such service.
 ``(5) Regulations.--The Secretary shall provide by 
 regulation such definitions of other terms used in this section 
 as the Secretary determines appropriate.''.
 (b) Quarterly Benefit Statements.--Section 105 of such Act (29 
U.S.C. 1025) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(2)--
 (A) by redesignating subparagraph (C) as 
 subparagraph (H);
 (B) in subparagraph (B)(ii)--
 (i) in subclause (II), by striking 
 ``diversified, and'' and inserting 
 ``diversified,'';
 (ii) in subclause (III), by striking the 
 period and inserting ``, and'';
 (iii) by adding after subclause (III) the 
 following new subclause:
 ``(IV) with respect to the portion 
 of a participant's account for which 
 the participant has the right to direct 
 the investment of assets, the 
 information described in subparagraph 
 (C).''; and
 (C) by inserting after subparagraph (B) the 
 following new subparagraphs:
 ``(C) Periodic account information for participants 
 and beneficiaries.--For purposes of subparagraph 
 (B)(ii)(IV), the information described in this 
 subparagraph consists of the following, indicating the 
 portion of each amount described in clauses (i) though 
 (vii) attributable to each investment option elected in 
 connection with the participant's account:
 ``(i) the starting balance of the 
 participant's account,
 ``(ii) contributions made during the 
 quarter, itemizing separately totals for 
 employer and totals for employee contributions,
 ``(iii) investment earnings or losses on 
 the account balance during the quarter (if 
 any),
 ``(iv) actual or estimated charges (within 
 the meaning of section 111(e)(1)) which reduce 
 the account during the quarter, expressed in 
 dollars or, if estimated, such estimated dollar 
 charges as are derived from an expense ratio 
 (which may be expressed as a specific date 
 estimate based on reasonable assumptions stated 
 in the disclosure (such as the previous year's 
 expense ratio).
 ``(v) any other direct charges to the 
 participant or beneficiary in connection with 
 the participant's account,
 ``(vi) the ending balance of the account,
 ``(vii) the participant's asset allocation 
 to each investment option, expressed as an 
 amount and as a percentage, and
 ``(viii) how to obtain the most recently 
 updated version of the plan fee comparison 
 chart prepared for purposes of section 
 111(b)(3).
 ``(D) Other information.--The plan administrator 
 may include in the quarterly pension benefit statement 
 information relating to the historical return and risk 
 of each investment option and the estimated amount that 
 the participant needs to contribute each month or year 
 so as to retire at retirement age (as defined in 
 section 216(l) of the Social Security Act).
 ``(E) Estimations.--For purposes of making the 
 disclosure of actual charges or percentages as required 
 under this paragraph, the plan administrator may 
 provide a reasonable and representative estimate of 
 such charges or percentages and shall indicate any such 
 estimate as being such an estimate. Any such estimate 
 shall be based on reasonable assumptions included in 
 the statement (such as the previous year's experience).
 ``(F) Model statements.--The Secretary shall 
 prescribe one or more model pension benefit statements 
 that may be used for purposes of satisfying the 
 requirements of subparagraphs (B)(ii) and (C).
 ``(G) Annual compliance for small plans and with 
 respect to certain information.--In the case of a plan 
 providing for investment as described in paragraph 
 (1)(A)(i)--
 ``(i) if the plan has 100 or fewer 
 participants and beneficiaries, the plan may 
 provide the pension benefit statement under 
 paragraph (1) on an annual rather than a 
 quarterly basis, and
 ``(ii) the plan may comply with the 
 requirements of subparagraph (B)(ii)(IV) on an 
 annual rather than a quarterly basis.''; and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsections:
 ``(d) Assistance to Small Employers.--The Secretary shall make 
available to employers with 100 or fewer employees--
 ``(1) educational and compliance materials designed to 
 assist such employers in selecting and monitoring service 
 providers for individual account plans which permit a 
 participant or beneficiary to exercise control over the assets 
 in the account of the participant or beneficiary, investment 
 options under such plans, and charges relating to such options, 
 and
 ``(2) services designed to assist such employers in finding 
 and understanding affordable investment options for such plans 
 and in comparing the investment performance of, and charges 
 for, such options on an ongoing basis against appropriate 
 benchmarks or other appropriate measures.
 ``(e) Assistance to Plan Sponsors and Plan Participants and 
Beneficiaries.--The Secretary shall provide assistance to plan sponsors 
of individual account plans and participants and beneficiaries under 
such plans with any questions or problems regarding compliance with the 
requirements of this section.
 ``(f) Electronic Media.--Any disclosure required under this section 
may be provided through an electronic medium under such rules as shall 
be prescribed by the Secretary not later than 1 year after the date of 
the enactment of the 401(k) Fair Disclosure and Pension Security Act of 
2009. Such rules shall be similar to those applicable under the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 with respect to notices to participants 
in pension plans. The Secretary shall regularly modify such rules as 
appropriate to take into account new developments, including new forms 
of electronic media, and to fairly take into consideration the 
interests of plan sponsors, service providers, and participants. The 
rules prescribed by the Secretary pursuant to this subsection shall 
provide for a method for the typical participant or beneficiary to 
obtain without undue burden any such disclosure in writing on paper in 
lieu of receipt through an electronic medium.
 ``(g) Definitions.--For purposes of this section--
 ``(1) Charge.--The term `charge' means, in connection with 
 any service provided to a plan or any financial product 
 provided to the plan in which plan assets are to be invested, 
 any fee, credit, or other compensation charged or paid for such 
 service or product, including money and any other thing of 
 monetary value to be received by the provider of the service or 
 product, or its affiliate, in connection with the service or 
 product.
 ``(2) Service provider.--The terms `service provider' and 
 `provider' mean, in connection with a service (as defined in 
 section 111(e)(2)), a person directly or indirectly providing 
 such service.
 ``(3) Regulations.--The Secretary shall provide by 
 regulation such definitions of other terms used in this section 
 as the Secretary determines appropriate.''.
 (c) Enforcement.--Section 502 of such Act (29 U.S.C. 1132) is 
amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(6), by striking ``under paragraph 
 (2)'' and all that follows through ``subsection (c)'' and 
 inserting ``under paragraph (2), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (9), 
 (10), or (11) of subsection (c)''; and
 (2) in subsection (c), by redesignating the second 
 paragraph (10) as paragraph (12), and by inserting after the 
 first paragraph (10) the following new paragraph:
 ``(11)(A) In the case of any violation of section 111(a) by a 
service provider (as defined in section 111(e)(4)), the service 
provider may be assessed by the Secretary a civil penalty of up to 
$1,000 a day with respect to each such violation from the date of the 
initial violation until the date on which such violation is corrected, 
subject to a total maximum penalty of 10 percent of the amount 
involved, as determined by the Secretary.
 ``(B) Any plan administrator with respect to a plan who fails or 
refuses to provide a statement to participants and beneficiaries in 
accordance with section 105(a)(2)(B)(ii) or 111(b) may be assessed by 
the Secretary a civil penalty of up to $100 a day from the date of the 
failure or refusal to the date on which such statement or notice is so 
provided.
 ``(C) For purposes of this paragraph, each violation with respect 
to any single participant, beneficiary, or plan administrator shall be 
treated as a separate violation.''.
 (d) Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1 of 
such Act is amended by striking the item relating to section 111 and 
inserting the following new items:

``Sec. 111. Special reporting and disclosure rules for individual 
 account plans.
``Sec. 112. Repeal and effective date.''.
 (e) Effective Dates.--
 (1) Section 111(a) of the Employee Retirement Income 
 Security Act of 1974 (as added by subsection (a) of this 
 section) shall apply with respect to contracts or arrangements 
 for services entered into after one year after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act.
 (2) Section 111(b) of such Act (as added by subsection (a) 
 of this section) shall apply with respect to plan years 
 beginning after one year after the date of the enactment of 
 this Act.
 (3) The amendments made by subsection (b) of this section 
 shall apply with respect to pension benefit statements for 
 calendar quarters beginning after one year after the date of 
 the enactment of this Act.
 (4) The Secretary shall issue final regulations under the 
 amendments made by this section not later than 270 days after 
 the date of the enactment of this Act. Any act or practice in 
 advance of the issuance of final regulations under the 
 amendments made by this section which is in good faith 
 compliance with the requirements of such amendments shall be 
 treated as in compliance with any such final regulations.
 (f) Study Regarding Use of Benchmarks, Indices, and Other Points of 
Comparison in Plan Fee Comparison Charts.--
 (1) Study.--As soon as practicable after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Labor shall study the 
 efficacy of including benchmarks, indices, and other points of 
 comparison in plan fee comparison charts provided to 
 participants and beneficiaries pursuant to section 111(b)(3) of 
 the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (as added 
 by this Act).
 (2) Matters to be studied.--In the study required under 
 paragraph (1), the Secretary shall investigate whether, and the 
 extent to which, benchmarks, indices, and other points of 
 comparison included in plan fee comparison charts--
 (A) help participants and beneficiaries understand 
 the charges with respect to their individual account 
 plans,
 (B) help participants and beneficiaries make more 
 informed decisions on which investment options to 
 choose under such plans, and
 (C) bias participants and beneficiaries against 
 particular investment options under such plans, types 
 of investment, or individual account plans as a whole.
 (3) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall report to each House 
 of the Congress regarding the results of the study conducted 
 pursuant to this subsection, together with such recommendations 
 as the Secretary may consider appropriate.

SEC. 102. MINIMUM INVESTMENT OPTION REQUIREMENT FOR INDIVIDUAL ACCOUNT 
 PLANS.

 (a) In General.--Section 404(c) of the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1104(c)) is amended by adding at the 
end the following new paragraph:
 ``(6) Minimum investment option requirement for individual 
 account plans.--Paragraph (1)(A)(ii) shall not apply in 
 connection with any individual account plan which permits a 
 participant or beneficiary to exercise control over the assets 
 in the account of the participant or beneficiary unless the 
 plan includes at least one investment option--
 ``(A) which is a passively managed investment with 
 a portfolio of securities that is designed to be 
 representative of the United States investable equity 
 market (including representation of small, mid, and 
 large cap stocks) or the United States investment grade 
 bond market (including Treasury, agency, non-agency, 
 and corporate issues), or a combination thereof, and
 ``(B) which is described in the terms of the plan 
 as offered without any endorsement of the Government or 
 the plan sponsor.
 An investment shall not fail to satisfy the requirements of 
 subparagraph (A) in connection with either market described in 
 subparagraph (A) solely by reason of a failure to invest in all 
 or substantially all equities or bonds (as applicable) in such 
 market, if the methodology used to select the equities or bonds 
 is designed to approximate in a reasonable manner the broad 
 experience of such market.''.
 (b) Conforming Amendment.--Section 404(c)(1)(A)(ii) of such Act (29 
U.S.C. 1104(c)(1)(A)(ii)) is amended by inserting ``except as provided 
in section 404(c)(6) and'' after ``exercise of control,''.
 (c) Effective Dates.--
 (1) The amendments made by this section shall apply with 
 respect to plan years beginning after one year after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) The Secretary shall issue final regulations under the 
 amendments made by this section not later than 270 days after 
 the date of the enactment of this Act. Any act or practice in 
 advance of the issuance of final regulations under the 
 amendments made by this section which is in good faith 
 compliance with the requirements of such amendments shall be 
 treated as in compliance with any such final regulations.

SEC. 103. ENFORCEMENT COORDINATION AND REVIEW BY THE DEPARTMENT OF 
 LABOR.

 (a) In General.--Section 502 of the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1132) is amended by adding at the end 
the following new subsection:
 ``(n) Enforcement Coordination of Certain Disclosure Requirements 
and Review by the Department of Labor.--
 ``(1) In general.--
 ``(A) Notification and action.--The Secretary shall 
 notify the applicable regulatory authority in any case 
 in which the Secretary determines that a service 
 provider is engaged in a pattern or practice that 
 precludes compliance by plan administrators with 
 section 111. The Secretary shall, in consultation with 
 the applicable authority, take such timely enforcement 
 action under this title as is necessary to assure that 
 such pattern or practice ceases and desists and assess 
 any appropriate penalties.
 ``(B) Dissemination.--The Secretary shall widely 
 disseminate to employee pension benefit plans covered 
 by this title and their participants and beneficiaries 
 the identity of any service providers with respect to 
 such plans found to be engaged in any pattern or 
 practice described in subparagraph (A) with the intent 
 to preclude compliance by plan administrators with 
 section 111 and the particulars of such pattern or 
 practice. Prior to the dissemination of the identity of 
 any service providers identified and determined by the 
 Secretary to be engaged in such a pattern or practice, 
 such service provider shall receive a notice of intent 
 to disseminate, an opportunity to request an 
 administrative hearing, and a timely appeal to the 
 Secretary.
 ``(2) Annual audit of representative sampling of individual 
 account plans.--The Secretary shall annually audit a 
 representative sampling of individual account plans covered by 
 this title to determine compliance with the requirements of 
 section 111. The Secretary shall annually report the results of 
 such audit and any related recommendations of the Secretary to 
 the Committee on Education and Labor of the House of 
 Representatives and the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, 
 and Pensions of the Senate.''.
 (b) Review and Report to the Congress by Secretary of Labor 
Relating to Reporting and Disclosure Requirements.--
 (1) Study.--As soon as practicable after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Labor shall review the 
 reporting and disclosure requirements of part 1 of subtitle B 
 of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 
 1974 and related provisions of the Pension Protection Act of 
 2006.
 (2) Report.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the 
 enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Labor, in consultation 
 with the Secretary of the Treasury, shall make such 
 recommendations as the Secretary of Labor considers appropriate 
 to the appropriate committees of the Congress to consolidate, 
 simplify, standardize, and improve the applicable reporting and 
 disclosure requirements so as to simplify reporting for 
 employee pension benefit plans and ensure that needed 
 understandable information is provided to participants and 
 beneficiaries of such plans.

 TITLE II--PROHIBITION OF CONFLICTED INVESTMENT ADVICE

SEC. 201. FINDINGS.

 The Congress finds as follows:
 (1) The market downturn of 2008 had a devastating effect on 
 the retirement security income of millions of American workers.
 (2) According to the Congressional Budget Office, $2 
 trillion of Americans' retirement savings was wiped out over a 
 15-month period starting in 2008.
 (3) According to Congressional Budget Office estimates, the 
 value of pension funds and retirement accounts dropped by 
 roughly $1 trillion last year.
 (4) Individual average losses of participants in 401(k) 
 plans ranged from 7.2 percent to 11.2 percent in the first nine 
 months of 2008, according to an Employee Benefit Research 
 Institute analysis of 2.2 million retirements account 
 participants.
 (5) During the first nine months of 2008, stocks were down, 
 with the S&P 500 index losing more than 19 percent. With over 
 two-thirds of the assets in 401(k)-style defined contribution 
 plans invested in equities, either directly or through mutual 
 funds, participants are exposed to increased risk and lack 
 meaningful access to independent investment advise to help them 
 better plan for their retirement.
 (6) Currently, 401(k) plan account holders have access to a 
 self-interested or conflicted investment adviser.
 (7) In 2007, the Government Accountability Office concluded 
 that conflicts of interest can have an adverse affect on 
 defined benefit and defined contribution plans.

SEC. 202. INDEPENDENT INVESTMENT ADVISERS FOR INDIVIDUAL ACCOUNT PLANS.

 (a) In General.--Section 3 of the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002) is amended by adding at the end 
the following new paragraph:
 ``(43) Independent investment adviser.--
 ``(A) In general.--The term `independent investment 
 adviser' means, with respect to an individual account 
 plan that permits a participant or beneficiary to 
 direct the investment of assets in their individual 
 account, a person who--
 ``(i) is a fiduciary of the plan by reason 
 of the provision of investment advice referred 
 to in section 3(21)(A)(ii) by the person to the 
 plan or a participant or beneficiary of the 
 plan (irrespective of the manner in which such 
 advice is provided or the extent to which such 
 advice is based on a computer model), and
 ``(ii) meets the requirements of either 
 subparagraph (B) or (C).
 ``(B) Requirements applicable to investment 
 adviser.--An investment adviser meets the requirements 
 of this subparagraph, if--
 ``(i) such adviser is--
 ``(I) registered as an investment 
 adviser under the Investment Advisers 
 Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80b-1 et seq.) 
 or under the laws of the State in which 
 the adviser maintains its principal 
 office and place of business, or
 ``(II) any other person, but only 
 if every individual providing the 
 investment advice referred to in 
 section 3(21)(A)(ii) on behalf of such 
 person (or on behalf of any affiliate 
 thereof) is a registered representative 
 of a person described in subclause (I),
 ``(ii) such adviser is not the plan 
 investment provider,
 ``(iii) the fees or other compensation 
 received, directly or indirectly, by such 
 adviser (and any affiliate thereof) with 
 respect to the provision of investment advice 
 to any individual account plan or the 
 participants or beneficiaries of such a plan 
 either--
 ``(I) are not received from any 
 person or persons (or anyone affiliated 
 with such persons) that market, sell, 
 manage or provide investments in which 
 plan assets of the individual account 
 plan are invested, or
 ``(II) do not vary depending on the 
 basis of any investment option 
 selected, and are calculated pursuant 
 to one or more of the following bases--
 ``(aa) a flat-dollar basis,
 ``(bb) a flat percentage of 
 total plan assets basis,
 ``(cc) a flat or sliding-
 scale percentage of the assets 
 in a participant's or 
 beneficiary's account basis, or
 ``(dd) a per-participant or 
 per-beneficiary account basis, 
 and
 ``(iv) such adviser provides the investment 
 advice pursuant to a written arrangement with 
 the individual account plan that--
 ``(I) provides that the investment 
 adviser is a fiduciary of the plan with 
 respect to the provision of the advice,
 ``(II) requires that the advice be 
 provided only by registered 
 representatives of the investment 
 adviser or an affiliate thereof,
 ``(III) discloses, before a 
 reasonable period prior to entering 
 into such arrangement, whether the 
 investment adviser or any affiliate 
 thereof has any material financial, 
 referral, or other relationship or 
 arrangement with a money manager, 
 broker, other client of the investment 
 adviser or any affiliate thereof, other 
 service provider to the plan, or any 
 other entity that creates or may create 
 a conflict of interest for the 
 investment adviser in performing 
 services pursuant to the arrangement 
 with the plan and, if so, includes a 
 description of such relationship or 
 arrangement,
 ``(IV) includes a representation by 
 the investment adviser that, before the 
 arrangement was entered into (or 
 extended or renewed), the investment 
 adviser provided to the plan fiduciary 
 that has authority to cause the 
 employee benefit plan to enter into (or 
 extend or renew) the arrangement a 
 written statement disclosing all fees 
 or other compensation that the 
 investment adviser or any affiliate 
 thereof anticipates to receive with 
 respect to the advice during the first 
 year, or other period if less than a 
 year, of the arrangement,
 ``(V) provides that the investment 
 adviser will provide to such plan 
 fiduciary (and the participant and 
 beneficiary receiving the advice, if 
 applicable) a statement annually 
 disclosing all fees or other 
 compensation that the investment 
 adviser or any affiliate thereof has 
 received with respect to the advice 
 during the prior year, and
 ``(VI) provides that the terms of 
 the arrangement required under this 
 clause and any information provided 
 under such arrangement pursuant to 
 subclauses (III) and (IV) will also be 
 furnished by the investment adviser to 
 the participant or beneficiary that is 
 the recipient of the advice.
 ``(C) Advice provided to participants and 
 beneficiaries under an investment advice computer 
 program meeting requirements.--An investment adviser 
 meets the requirements of this subparagraph if the 
 investment advice provided by the adviser, to the 
 extent that such advice is provided to participants and 
 beneficiaries of individual account plans, is provided 
 under an investment advice computer program with 
 respect to which the requirements of clauses (i) 
 through (x) are met.
 ``(i) Adviser requirements.--The 
 requirements of this clause are met if the 
 investment adviser providing the investment 
 advice under the program is--
 ``(I) described in subclauses (I) 
 or (II) of subparagraph (B)(i),
 ``(II) an insurance company 
 qualified to do business under the laws 
 of a State,
 ``(III) a person registered as a 
 broker or dealer under the Securities 
 Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78a et 
 seq.),
 ``(IV) an affiliate of a person 
 described in any of subclauses (I) 
 through (III), or
 ``(V) an employee, agent, or 
 registered representative of a person 
 described in subclauses (I) through 
 (IV) who satisfies the requirements of 
 applicable insurance, banking, and 
 securities laws relating to the 
 provision of the advice.
 ``(ii) Computer model.--The requirements of 
 this clause are met if the investment advice 
 provided under the investment advice computer 
 program is provided pursuant to a computer 
 model that--
 ``(I) applies generally accepted 
 investment theories that take into 
 account the historic returns of 
 different asset classes over defined 
 periods of time,
 ``(II) utilizes relevant 
 information about the participant, 
 which may include age, life expectancy, 
 retirement age, risk tolerance, other 
 assets or sources of income, and 
 preferences as to certain types of 
 investments,
 ``(III) utilizes prescribed 
 objective criteria to provide asset 
 allocation portfolios comprised of 
 investment options available under the 
 plan,
 ``(IV) operates in a manner that is 
 not biased in favor of investments 
 offered by the investment adviser or 
 any person with a material affiliation 
 or contractual relationship with the 
 investment adviser,
 ``(V) takes into account all 
 investment options under the plan in 
 specifying how a participant's account 
 balance should be invested and is not 
 inappropriately weighted with respect 
 to any investment option,
 ``(VI) operates so that it does 
 not, directly or indirectly, in any 
 manner act to benefit the investment 
 adviser (or any affiliate of the 
 adviser or any person with a material 
 affiliation or contractual relationship 
 with the adviser) at the expense of 
 plan participants and beneficiaries,
 ``(VII) takes into account the fees 
 associated with each investment option, 
 and
 ``(VIII) conforms to such other 
 requirements as shall be prescribed by 
 the Secretary to ensure that it 
 operates in the best interest of plan 
 participants and beneficiaries.
 ``(iii) Certification.--
 ``(I) In general.--The requirements 
 of this clause are met with respect to 
 the program if an eligible investment 
 expert certifies, prior to the 
 utilization of the computer model and 
 in accordance with rules prescribed by 
 the Secretary, that the computer model 
 meets the requirements of clause (ii).
 ``(II) Renewal of certifications.--
 If, as determined under regulations 
 prescribed by the Secretary, there are 
 material modifications to the computer 
 model, the requirements of this 
 subparagraph are met only if a 
 certification described in subclause 
 (I) is obtained with respect to the 
 computer model as so modified.
 ``(III) Eligible investment 
 expert.--For purposes of this clause, 
 the term `eligible investment expert' 
 means any person--
 ``(aa) which meets such 
 requirements as the Secretary 
 may provide, and
 ``(bb) does not have any 
 material affiliation or 
 contractual relationship with 
 any investment adviser or a 
 related person thereof (or any 
 employee, agent, or registered 
 representative of the 
 investment adviser or related 
 person).
 ``(iv) Exclusivity of recommendation.--The 
 requirements of this clause are met with 
 respect to the program, if--
 ``(I) the only investment advice 
 provided under the program is the 
 advice generated by the computer model 
 described in clause (ii), and
 ``(II) any transaction pursuant to 
 the investment advice occurs solely at 
 the direction of the participant or 
 beneficiary.
 ``(v) Express authorization by separate 
 fiduciary.--The requirements of this clause are 
 met with respect to the program if the program 
 is expressly authorized by a plan fiduciary 
 other than--
 ``(I) the person offering the 
 program,
 ``(II) any person that is a plan 
 investment provider with respect to the 
 plan, and
 ``(III) any affiliate of either 
 person described in subclause (I) or 
 (II).
 ``(vi) Annual audit.--The requirements of 
 this clause are met with respect to the program 
 if an independent auditor, who has appropriate 
 technical training or experience and 
 proficiency and so represents in writing--
 ``(I) conducts an annual audit of 
 the program other than the computer 
 model referred to in clause (ii) which 
 is certified pursuant to clause (iii) 
 for compliance with the requirements of 
 this subparagraph, and
 ``(II) following completion of the 
 annual audit, issues a written report 
 to the fiduciary who authorized use of 
 the program which presents its specific 
 findings regarding compliance of the 
 program with the requirements of this 
 subsection.
 For purposes of this clause, an auditor is 
 considered independent if it is not related to 
 the person offering the program to the plan and 
 is not affiliated with any person providing 
 investment options under the plan.
 ``(vii) Disclosure.--The requirements of 
 this clause are met with respect to the 
 program, if--
 ``(I) the investment adviser 
 provides to the fiduciary referred to 
 in clause (v) and the participant or 
 beneficiary receiving investment advice 
 under the program with regard to any 
 security or other property offered as 
 an investment option, before providing 
 the advice, a written notification 
 (which may consist of notification by 
 means of electronic communication)--
 ``(aa) of the role of any 
 party that has a material 
 affiliation or contractual 
 relationship with the 
 investment adviser in the 
 development of the investment 
 advice program and in the 
 selection of investment options 
 available under the plan,
 ``(bb) of all fees or other 
 compensation relating to the 
 advice that the investment 
 adviser or any affiliate 
 thereof is to receive 
 (including compensation 
 provided by any third party) in 
 connection with the provision 
 of the advice or in connection 
 with the sale, acquisition, or 
 holding of the security or 
 other property,
 ``(cc) of any material 
 affiliation or contractual 
 relationship of the investment 
 adviser or affiliates thereof 
 in the security or other 
 property,
 ``(dd) of the manner, and 
 under what circumstances, any 
 information relating to the 
 participant or beneficiary 
 which is provided under the 
 program will be used or 
 disclosed,
 ``(ee) of the types of 
 services provided by the 
 investment adviser in 
 connection with the provision 
 of investment advice by the 
 investment adviser, and
 ``(ff) that a recipient of 
 the advice may separately 
 arrange for the provision of 
 advice by another adviser, that 
 could have no material 
 affiliation with, and could 
 receive no fees or other 
 compensation, in connection 
 with the security or other 
 property, and
 ``(II) at all times during the 
 provision of advisory services to the 
 participant or beneficiary, the 
 investment adviser--
 ``(aa) maintains the 
 information described in 
 subclause (I) in accurate form 
 and in the manner described in 
 clause (ix),
 ``(bb) provides, without 
 charge, accurate information to 
 the recipient of the advice no 
 less frequently than annually,
 ``(cc) provides, without 
 charge, accurate information to 
 the recipient of the advice 
 upon request of the recipient, 
 and
 ``(dd) provides, without 
 charge, accurate information to 
 the recipient of the advice 
 concerning any material change 
 to the information required to 
 be provided to the recipient of 
 the advice at a time reasonably 
 contemporaneous to the change 
 in information.
 ``(viii) Other conditions.--The 
 requirements of this clause are met with 
 respect to the program, if--
 ``(I) the investment adviser 
 provides appropriate disclosure, in 
 connection with the sale, acquisition, 
 or holding of the security or other 
 property with respect to which the 
 investment advice is provided under the 
 program, in accordance with all 
 applicable securities laws,
 ``(II) the sale, acquisition, or 
 holding occurs solely at the direction 
 of the recipient of the advice,
 ``(III) the compensation received 
 by the investment adviser and 
 affiliates thereof in connection with 
 the sale, acquisition, or holding of 
 the security or other property is 
 reasonable, and
 ``(IV) the terms of the sale, 
 acquisition, or holding of the security 
 or other property are at least as 
 favorable to the plan as an arm's 
 length transaction would be.
 ``(ix) Standards for presentation of 
 information.--
 ``(I) In general.--The requirements 
 of this clause are met with respect to 
 the program if the notification 
 required to be provided to participants 
 and beneficiaries under clause (vii)(I) 
 is written in a clear and conspicuous 
 manner and in a manner calculated to be 
 understood by the average plan 
 participant and is sufficiently 
 accurate and comprehensive to 
 reasonably apprise such participants 
 and beneficiaries of the information 
 required to be provided in the 
 notification.
 ``(II) Model form for disclosure of 
 fees and other compensation.--The 
 Secretary shall issue a model form for 
 the disclosure of fees and other 
 compensation required in clause 
 (vii)(I)(bb) which meets the 
 requirements of subclause (I).
 ``(x) Maintenance for 6 years of evidence 
 of compliance.--The requirements of this clause 
 are met with respect to the program if the 
 investment adviser who provides advice under 
 the program maintains, for a period of not less 
 than 6 years after the provision of the advice, 
 any records necessary for determining whether 
 the requirements of the preceding provisions of 
 this subparagraph and of subsection (b)(14) 
 have been met. A failure to meet the 
 requirements of this clause shall not be 
 considered to have occurred solely because the 
 records are lost or destroyed prior to the end 
 of the 6-year period due to circumstances 
 beyond the control of the investment adviser.
 ``(D) Definitions.--For purposes of this 
 paragraph--
 ``(i) Affiliate.--The term `affiliate' 
 means, in connection with any other person, any 
 person directly or indirectly (through one or 
 more intermediaries) controlling, controlled 
 by, or under common control with such other 
 person, or any officer, director, agent, or 
 employee of, or partner with, such other 
 person.
 ``(ii) Registered representative.--The term 
 `registered representative' of another entity 
 means a person described in section 3(a)(18) of 
 the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 
 78c(a)(18)) (substituting the entity for the 
 broker or dealer referred to in such section) 
 or a person described in section 202(a)(17) of 
 the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 
 80b-2(a)(17)) (substituting the entity for the 
 investment adviser referred to in such 
 section).
 ``(iii) Plan investment provider.--The term 
 `plan investment provider' means any person (or 
 any person affiliated with such person) that 
 creates or manages any investment in which any 
 individual account plan invests. Such term does 
 not include--
 ``(I) a plan sponsor (or an 
 affiliate thereof) with respect to any 
 investment created or managed by the 
 plan sponsor (or affiliate), if only 
 employee benefit plans maintained by 
 such plan sponsor or an affiliate 
 thereof invest in such investments,
 ``(II) any person who makes the 
 investment available to the plan, or 
 any participant or beneficiary in the 
 plan, as a part of a portfolio of 
 investment options, to the extent that 
 the investment options are created and 
 managed by a person who is not an 
 affiliate of the person making such 
 portfolio available, and
 ``(III) any person, solely by 
 reason of authorization by a 
 participant or beneficiary in the plan 
 of such person to exercise control over 
 the assets in the participant's or 
 beneficiary's account in such plan, if 
 such assets are not invested in any 
 investments created or managed by such 
 person (or an affiliate thereof).
 ``(iv) Fees or other compensation.--The 
 term `fees or other compensation' includes 
 money or any other thing of monetary value (for 
 example, gifts, awards, and trips) received, or 
 to be received, directly from the plan or plan 
 sponsor or indirectly (i.e., from any source 
 other than the plan or the plan sponsor) by the 
 investment adviser or any affiliate thereof in 
 connection with the advice to be provided 
 pursuant to the arrangement or because of the 
 investment adviser's or any affiliate's 
 position with the plan. Fees or other 
 compensation may be expressed in terms of a 
 monetary amount, percentage of the plan's 
 assets, or per capita charge for each 
 participant or beneficiary of the plan. The 
 manner in which compensation or fees are 
 expressed shall contain sufficient information 
 to enable the plan fiduciary to evaluate the 
 reasonableness of such compensation or fees.''.
 (b) Fiduciary Duties With Respect to Investment Advice.--
 (1) In general.--Section 404(a) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 
 1104(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new 
 paragraph:
 ``(3)(A) The fiduciary of an individual account plan that permits a 
participant or beneficiary to direct the investment of assets in the 
individual account shall not appoint, contract with, or otherwise 
arrange for an investment adviser to provide investment advice referred 
to in section 3(21)(A)(ii) to the plan or the participant or 
beneficiary unless the investment adviser is an independent investment 
adviser (as defined in section 3(43)).
 ``(B) The independent investment adviser providing investment 
advice to a plan or to a participant or beneficiary shall provide, 
before a reasonable period prior to the initial provision of the 
advice, a written notification--
 ``(i) of the past performance and historical rates of 
 return of the investment options available with respect to the 
 plan and comparisons of such options to relevant benchmarks, 
 and
 ``(ii) that the investment adviser is acting as a fiduciary 
 of the plan in connection with the provision of the advice.
 ``(C) Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to exempt a plan 
sponsor or other person who is a fiduciary from any requirement of this 
part for the prudent selection and periodic review of an independent 
investment adviser with whom the plan sponsor or other person enters 
into an arrangement for the provision of investment advice referred to 
in section 3(21)(A)(ii), except that any such requirement shall not be 
construed to preclude reasonable reliance by the plan sponsor or other 
person on the representation of any person that such person making the 
representation meets the requirements of section 3(43)(A). The plan 
sponsor and any other person who is a fiduciary (other than the 
independent investment adviser) has no duty under this part to monitor 
the specific investment advice given by the independent investment 
adviser to any particular recipient of the advice and shall not be 
liable under this title for any loss, or by reason of any breach, which 
results from such specific investment advice given by the independent 
investment adviser.
 ``(D) Nothing in this part shall be construed to preclude the use 
of plan assets to pay for reasonable expenses in providing investment 
advice referred to in section 3(21)(A)(ii).''.
 (2) Report on prior advisory opinions and exceptions.--The 
 Secretary of Labor shall, as soon as practicable after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act--
 (A) review each Advisory Opinion and exception 
 described in section 404(a)(3)(E)(i) of the Employee 
 Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (as added by 
 this paragraph (1)) to determine the extent to which 
 such Advisory Opinion or exception fails to adequately 
 serve the interests of participants and beneficiaries 
 and to be adequately protective of the rights of 
 participants and beneficiaries, and
 (B) submit a report to each House of the Congress 
 describing the extent of any such failure by any such 
 Advisory Opinion or exception.
 (c) Conforming Amendments.--Section 408 of such Act (29 U.S.C. 
1108) is amended--
 (1) by striking subsection (g); and
 (2) by striking subsection (b)(14)(B) and inserting the 
 following:
 ``(B) the investment advice is provided by an 
 independent investment adviser (as defined in section 
 3(43)).''.
 (d) Regulatory Authority.--The Secretary of Labor may issue 
regulations providing that an investment adviser can still be 
considered as meeting the requirements of section 3(43)(B) of the 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 despite the receipt of 
a de minimus amount of compensation that fails to meet the requirements 
of section 3(43)(B)(iii) of such Act due to the existence of previously 
existing contracts.
 (e) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to plan years beginning after one year after the date of the 
enactment of this Act.

SEC. 203. EXPANSION OF OUTREACH TO PROMOTE RETIREMENT INCOME SAVINGS TO 
 INCLUDE PROMOTION OF EDUCATION ON FINANCIAL LITERACY WITH 
 RESPECT TO INVESTMENT FOR RETIREMENT.

 Section 516 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 
(29 U.S.C. 1146) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b), by inserting after ``creation of 
 educational materials,'' the following: ``promotion of 
 education in financial literacy with respect to investment for 
 retirement as provided in subsection (e),'';
 (2) by redesignating subsection (e) as subsection (f); and
 (3) by inserting after subsection (d) the following new 
 subsection:
 ``(e) Promotion of Education in Financial Literacy With Respect to 
Investment for Retirement.--The Secretary, in consultation with the 
Secretary of Education and the Secretary of the Treasury, shall 
establish a program under which--
 ``(1) employees and the general public are provided with 
 information and materials--
 ``(A) informing them about resources available for 
 attaining financial literacy with respect to investment 
 for retirement,
 ``(B) effectively educating them about the 
 importance of, and appropriate techniques with respect 
 to, personal finance, saving for retirement, and 
 choosing independent investment advisers when managing 
 their accounts under individual account plans, and
 ``(C) effectively educating them about debt 
 obligations, the relationship of debt to savings, and 
 the potential consequences of debt with respect to 
 saving for retirement,
 ``(2) employers are enlisted to participate in such program 
 so as to assist in the attainment of the goals described in 
 subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) of paragraph (1) with respect 
 to their employees, and
 ``(3) appropriate standards of financial literacy of 
 employees and the general public with respect to investment for 
 retirement are developed and published for utilization under 
 such program.''.
 (4) Study and report to the congress.--
 (A) In general.--The Secretary of Labor shall 
 conduct a survey of ongoing efforts by the Federal 
 Government to assist employees and the general public 
 with attainment of financial literacy with respect to 
 investment for retirement and to educate them about the 
 importance of, and appropriate techniques with respect 
 to, personal finance, debt obligations, saving for 
 retirement, and choosing independent investment 
 advisers when managing their accounts under individual 
 account plans.
 (B) Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date 
 of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall 
 submit a report to each House of the Congress setting 
 forth the results of the Secretary's survey conducted 
 pursuant to subparagraph (A), together with such 
 recommendations as the Secretary considers appropriate 
 for improvement in efforts by the Federal Government in 
 assisting employees and the general public with 
 attainment of financial literacy in connection with 
 investment for retirement and educating them about the 
 importance of, and appropriate techniques with respect 
 to, personal finance, debt obligations, saving for 
 retirement, and choosing independent investment 
 advisers when managing their accounts under individual 
 account plans.

 TITLE III--TRANSITIONAL FUNDING RELIEF FOR DEFINED BENEFIT PLANS

SEC. 301. ELECTION TO USE YIELD CURVE.

 (a) Amendment to ERISA.--The last sentence of clause (ii) of 
section 303(h)(2)(D) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 
1974 (29 U.S.C. 1083(h)(2)(D)(ii)) is amended to read as follows: 
``Such election, once made, may be revoked only with the consent of the 
Secretary, except that any election in effect for a plan with respect 
to a plan year beginning in 2009 may be revoked for the plan year 
beginning in 2010 without such consent.''.
 (b) Amendment to IRC.--The last sentence of clause (ii) of section 
430(h)(2)(D) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to election 
to use yield curve) is amended to read as follows: ``Such election, 
once made, may be revoked only with the consent of the Secretary, 
except that any election in effect for a plan with respect to a plan 
year beginning in 2009 may be revoked for the plan year beginning in 
2010 without such consent.''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to plan years beginning after December 31, 2009.

SEC. 302. EFFECTIVE DATE OF REGULATIONS.

 The Secretary of the Treasury shall--
 (1) make the final regulations issued under sections 206(g) 
 and 303 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 
 and sections 430 and 436 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 
 effective no earlier than plan years beginning after December 
 31, 2009; and
 (2) provide rules, for plan years beginning before the 
 effective date of such final regulations, under which 
 compliance with a reasonable interpretation of an applicable 
 provision under section 206(g) or 303 of the Employee 
 Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 or section 430 or 436 of 
 the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall be treated as 
 compliance with such provision.

SEC. 303. CLARIFICATION OF TREATMENT OF EXPENSES.

 (a) Amendments to ERISA.--
 (1) In general.--Clause (ii) of section 303(b)(1)(A) of the 
 Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 
 1083(b)(1)(A)(ii)) is amended by striking ``plan-related 
 expenses'' and inserting ``plan-related administrative 
 expenses''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Subclause (II) of section 
 303(i)(2)(A)(i) of such Act (29 U.S.C. 1083(i)(2)(A)(i)(II)) is 
 amended by striking ``plan-related expenses'' and inserting 
 ``plan-related administrative expenses''.
 (b) Amendments to IRC.--
 (1) In general.--Clause (ii) of section 430(b)(1)(A) of the 
 Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to target normal cost) 
 is amended by striking ``plan-related expenses'' and inserting 
 ``plan-related administrative expenses''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Subclause (II) of section 
 430(i)(2)(A)(i) of such Code is amended by striking ``plan-
 related expenses'' and inserting ``plan-related administrative 
 expenses''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take 
effect as if included in the enactment of paragraphs (1)(A), (1)(F)(i), 
(2)(A), and (2)(F)(i) of section 101(b) of the Worker, Retiree, and 
Employer Recovery Act of 2008 (Public Law 110-458; 122 Stat. 5093).

SEC. 304. INFORMATION REPORTING.

 (a) In General.--Paragraph (1) of section 4010(b) of the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1310(b)(1)) is 
amended to read as follows:
 ``(1) either of the following requirements are met:
 ``(A) the funding target attainment percentage (as 
 defined in subsection (d)) at the end of the preceding 
 plan year of a plan maintained by the contributing 
 sponsor or any member of its controlled group is less 
 thqan 80 percent; or
 ``(B) the aggregate unfunded vested benefits (as 
 determined under section 4006(a)(3)(E)(iii)) of plans 
 maintained by the contributing sponsor and the members 
 of its controlled group exceed $50,000,000 
 (disregarding plans with no unfunded vested 
 benefits);''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply 
to years beginning after 2009.

SEC. 305. 5-YEAR EXTENSION OF AUTOMATIC AMORTIZATION EXTENSION PERIOD 
 FOR MULTIEMPLOYER PLANS.

 (a) ERISA Amendments.--Section 304(d) of the Employee Retirement 
Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1084(d)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)(A), by striking ``5 years'' and 
 inserting ``10 years''; and
 (2) in paragraph (2)(A), by striking ``10 years'' and 
 inserting ``15 years''.
 (b) IRC Amendments.--Section 431(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 
1986 (relating to extension of amortization periods for multiemployer 
plans) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)(A), by striking ``5 years'' and 
 inserting ``10 years''; and
 (2) in paragraph (2)(A), by striking ``10 years'' and 
 inserting ``15 years''.
 (c) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply with respect to applications for extension filed on or after the 
date of the enactment of this Act.

SEC. 306. PENSION PLAN MAINTAINED BY CHRISTIAN SCHOOLS INTERNATIONAL 
 TREATED AS CHURCH PLAN.

 (a) In General.--For purposes of title I of the Employee Retirement 
Income Security Act of 1974 and the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, any 
pension plan maintained by Christian Schools International as of 
January 1, 2009, shall be treated as a church plan within the meaning 
of section 3(33) of such Act and section 414(e) of such Code which is 
maintained by an organization described in section 3(33)(C)(ii)(II) of 
such Act and section 414(e)(3)(B)(ii) of such Code.
 (b) Effective Date.--This section shall apply to plan years 
beginning on or after January 1, 2007.

SEC. 307. SPECIAL RULE FOR DETERMINING ADEQUATE CONSIDERATION IN 
 CONNECTION WITH THE PURCHASE AND SALE OF QUALIFYING 
 EMPLOYER SECURITIES.

 (a) In General.--Section 3(18) of the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1002(18)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating clauses (i) and (ii) of subparagraph 
 (A) as subclauses (I) and (II), respectively, and by 
 redesignating subparagraphs (A) and (B) as clauses (i) and 
 (ii), respectively;
 (2) by inserting ``(A)'' after ``(18)''; and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(B) In the case of a plan described in section 407(d)(3)(A) which 
was in existence on the date of the enactment of this Act, if the 
valuation set for the purchase or sale by the plan of a qualifying 
employer security (as defined in section 407(d)(5)) is set at a price 
which has not been found by the Secretary to be in violation of this 
Act and which is book value computed annually in accordance with 
generally accepted accounting principles and the provisions of the 
plan, and if the valuations set for all prior purchases or sales by the 
plan of qualifying employer securities have been consistently so 
priced, then all such valuations for qualifying employer securities 
shall be deemed to be adequate consideration within the meaning of 
subparagraph (A).''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to purchases and sales of qualifying employer securities on or 
after September 2, 1974.

SEC. 308. EXTENDED PERIOD FOR SINGLE-EMPLOYER DEFINED BENEFIT PLANS TO 
 AMORTIZE THE SHORTFALL AMORTIZATION BASE FOR 2009 AND 
 2010.

 (a) Amendments to ERISA.--
 (1) In general.--Paragraph (2) of section 303(c) of the 
 Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 is amended by 
 adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 ``(D) Special rule for 2009 and 2010.--In the case 
 of the shortfall amortization base of the plan for any 
 plan year beginning in 2009 or 2010 (hereafter in this 
 subparagraph referred to as the `base year')--
 ``(i) Determination of installments.--The 
 shortfall amortization installments are--
 ``(I) in the case of the last 7 
 plan years in the 9-plan-year period 
 beginning with the base year, the 
 amounts necessary to amortize the 
 shortfall amortization base of the plan 
 for the base year in level annual 
 installments over such last 7 plan 
 years, and
 ``(II) in the case of the first 2 
 plan years in such 9-plan-year period, 
 interest on such shortfall amortization 
 base (determined as provided in 
 subparagraph (C)).
 ``(ii) Shortfall installment.--The 
 shortfall amortization installment for any plan 
 year in the 9-plan-year period under clause (i) 
 with respect to such shortfall amortization 
 base is the annual installment determined under 
 clause (i) for that year for that base.''.
 (2) Conforming amendment.--Paragraph (1) of section 303(c) 
 of such Act is amended by striking ``the shortfall amortization 
 bases for such plan year and each of the 6 preceding plan 
 years'' and inserting ``any shortfall amortization base which 
 has not been fully amortized under this subsection''.
 (b) Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall 
apply to plan years beginning after December 31, 2008.
 Union Calendar No. 289

111th CONGRESS

 2d Session

 H. R. 2989

 [Report No. 111-244, Part I]

_______________________________________________________________________

 A BILL

To amend the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 to provide 
special reporting and disclosure rules for individual account plans and 
 to provide a minimum investment option requirement for such plans, to 
 amend such Act to provide for independent investment advice for 
 participants and beneficiaries under individual account plans, and to 
 amend such Act and the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to provide 
 transitional relief under certain pension funding rules added by the 
 Pension Protection Act of 2006.

_______________________________________________________________________

 May 28, 2010

Discharged; committed to the Committee of the Whole House on the State 
 of the Union and ordered to be printed