HR 2649 SC
101st CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 2649
To direct the Secretary of Health and Human Services to promulgate national
standards regarding the provision of health insurance to individuals with
pre-existing conditions, to require States to adopt such standards or equally
effective laws, rules, or regulations, and for other purposes.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
June 14, 1989
Mr. WALGREN introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Energy and Commerce
July 19, 1990
Additional sponsors: Mr. ROE, Mr. DE LUGO, Mrs. BOXER, Mr. KOLTER, Mr. BATES,
Mr. MCDERMOTT, Mr. DYMALLY, Ms. KAPTUR, Mr. EVANS, Ms. PELOSI, Mr. HUCKABY,
Mr. FOGLIETTA, Mr. PAYNE of New Jersey, Mr. SHAYS, Mr. HAYES of Louisiana,
Mr. SMITH of New Jersey, Mr. WISE, and Mr. Ravenel
A BILL
To direct the Secretary of Health and Human Services to promulgate national
standards regarding the provision of health insurance to individuals with
pre-existing conditions, to require States to adopt such standards or equally
effective laws, rules, or regulations, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Federal Health Insurance Equity Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. PROMULGATION OF NATIONAL STANDARDS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of
 this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall, in accordance
 with section 553 of title 5, United States Code, promulgate national
 minimum standards regarding the provision of health insurance to persons
 with pre-existing conditions.
 (b) DESCRIPTION OF STANDARDS- (1) The national minimum standards referred
 to in subsection (a) shall include provisions--
 (A) establishing standards for providing basic items and services for which
 payment shall be made at a reasonable cost under a health benefit plan,
 based upon the most recent available medical and financial data;
 (B) establishing standards for the amount of premiums, deductibles,
 copayments, and coinsurance which may be assessed under a health benefit
 plan, based upon the most recent available medical and financial data;
 (C) prohibiting the sponsor of a health benefit plan from excluding,
 terminating, or otherwise limiting any individual from coverage under the
 plan on the basis that the individual has a pre-existing condition; and
 (D) prohibiting the sponsor of a health benefit plan from determining
 the amount of any premium, deductible, copayment, or coinsurance for an
 individual or group of individuals on the basis of the number or amount
 of claims submitted by such individual or individuals.
 (2) The national minimum standards referred to in subsection (a) may
 not include provisions prohibiting the sponsor of a health benefit plan
 from establishing uniform eligibility requirements, applicable to all plan
 participants, regarding minimum waiting periods, minimum enrollment periods,
 or open enrollment periods.
SEC. 3. COMPLIANCE WITH STANDARDS BY SPONSORS; ADOPTION OF STANDARDS BY STATES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Not later than 24 months after the promulgation of the
 national minimum standards for the provision of health insurance described
 in section 2 and notwithstanding any other provision of law, each sponsor
 of a health benefit plan shall comply with, and each State shall adopt, and
 assume responsibility for enforcing through the assessment of appropriate
 penalties for non-compliance, such national minimum standards. Each State
 shall submit evidence to the Secretary demonstrating that the State has
 so adopted, and assumed responsibility for enforcing, such standards.
 (b) CERTIFICATION BY SECRETARY- (1) Not later than 6 months after receiving
 evidence from a State under subsection (a), the Secretary shall certify
 that the State has adopted, and assumed responsibility for enforcing,
 the national minimum standards promulgated under section 2 if, to the
 satisfaction of the Secretary, the State--
 (A) demonstrates that it has incorporated such minimum standards in its own
 law or has otherwise adopted laws, rules, regulations, and standards which
 ensure, at least as effectively as such minimum standards, the provision
 of adequate health insurance to individuals in the State at a fair and
 reasonable cost regardless of pre-existing conditions; and
 (B) demonstrates that it has established an office to investigate complaints
 that a sponsor of a health benefit plan is not in compliance with State
 law and to provide the public with information and assistance on matters
 relating to health benefits coverage.
 (2) In the case of a State which the Secretary determines must enact
 legislation (other than legislation appropriating funds) in order to adopt,
 and assume responsibility for enforcing, the national minimum standards
 promulgated under section 2, the Secretary may not refuse to certify the
 State solely on the basis of its failure to adopt, and assume responsibility
 for enforcing, such standards before the close of the first regular session
 of the State legislature that begins after the date of the promulgation
 of the standards described in section 2. For purposes of the preceding
 sentence, in the case of a State that has a 2-year legislative session,
 each year of such session shall be deemed to be a separate regular session
 of the State legislature.
 (c) WITHDRAWAL- If the Secretary finds, after affording appropriate notice
 and opportunity for comment, that a certified State is not adequately
 enforcing its laws relating to the provision of health insurance to
 individuals in the State regardless of pre-existing conditions, or that those
 laws, rules, regulations, and standards no longer promote the objectives
 of this Act as effectively as the national minimum standards promulgated
 under section 2, the Secretary shall withdraw the State's certification.
SEC. 4. ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS.
 (a) FEDERAL SANCTIONS-
 (1) CIVIL MONEY PENALTY- (A) Any sponsor of a health benefit plan which does
 not comply with the national minimum standards promulgated under section
 2 shall be liable to the United States for a civil penalty, assessed by
 an order issued by the Secretary, of $100 per each individual enrolled in
 such plan for each day the sponsor does not comply with such standards.
 (B) The Secretary may, on the basis of mitigating factors, compromise,
 modify, or remit, with or without conditions, any civil penalty assessed
 pursuant to subparagraph (A).
 (C) If the Secretary issues an order pursuant to subparagraph (A), the
 sponsor who is the subject of the order may, before the expiration of the
 30-day period beginning on the date the order is issued, seek judicial
 review of the order pursuant to section 1331 of title 28, United States
 Code, and chapter 7 of title 5, United States Code.
 (D) If a sponsor does not seek judicial review pursuant to subparagraph (C),
 the Secretary may commence a civil action in any appropriate district court
 of the United States for the purposes of recovering the amount assessed and
 an amount representing interest at a rate computed in accordance with section
 1961 of title 28, United States Code. Such interest shall accrue from the
 expiration of the 30-day period described in subpargraph (C). In such an
 action, the decision of the Secretary to issue the order, and the amount
 of the penalty assessed by the Secretary, shall not be subject to review.
 (2) LIABILITY TO INDIVIDUALS FOR DAMAGES- Any sponsor of a health benefit
 plan which does not comply with the national minimum standards promulgated
 under section 2 shall be liable for damages (including health care costs
 incurred) to an individual covered under the plan or the individual's
 family resulting from such failure to comply.
 (3) EFFECTIVE DATE- The provisions of this subsection shall take effect
 30 months after the promulgation of the national minimum health insurance
 standards under section 2.
 (b) NON-APPLICATION OF CIVIL MONEY PENALTY TO CERTAIN SPONSORS- The
 sanctions described in subsection (a)(1) shall not apply with respect to
 sponsors of health benefit plans--
 (1) who are subject to the insurance laws, rules, or regulations of a
 certified State; or
 (2) who are found to be in compliance with the national minimum health
 insurance standards promulgated under section 2 by an entity designated
 by the Secretary to monitor sponsor compliance with such standards for a
 State that is not a certified State.
SEC. 5. DEFINITIONS.
 In this Act:
 (1) The term `certified State' means a State that the Secretary,
 in accordance with section 3(b), certifies has adopted, and assumed
 responsibility for enforcing, the national minimum health insurance
 standards promulgated under section 2.
 (2) The term `health benefit plan' means any plan, fund, or program that
 provides medical care to participants or beneficiaries directly or through
 insurance, reimbursement, or otherwise.
 (3) The term `pre-existing condition' means any disease, disability,
 disorder, impairment, or other health condition.
 (4) The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
 (5) The term `sponsor' means any entity in a State providing a health
 benefit plan in a State.
 (6) The term `State' means any of the several States, the District of
 Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam,
 American Samoa, and the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.