S 547 IS
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 547
To repeal a provision of Federal tort claim law relating to the civil
liability of Government contractors for certain injuries, losses of property,
and deaths and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
March 9 (legislative day, JANUARY 3), 1989
Mr. REID (for himself and Mr. BRYAN) introduced the following bill; which
was read twice and referred to the Committee on the Judiciary
A BILL
To repeal a provision of Federal tort claim law relating to the civil
liability of Government contractors for certain injuries, losses of property,
and deaths and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled, That this Act may be cited as the
 `Radiation Victims Fair Treatment Act'.
FINDINGS
 SEC. 2. The Congress finds that--
 (1) civilians working at the Nevada Test Site and civilians living near
 the test site were exposed to radiation from aboveground nuclear tests;
 (2) this exposure to radiation caused disease and eventual death to many
 of these civilians;
 (3) the lives and health of these civilians was put at risk to serve the
 national security interests of the United States; and
 (4) such civilians deserve fair treatment by allowing them their day in
 court to seek redress from the parties responsible for the radiation.
REPEALER
 SEC. 3. Section 1631 of the Department of Defense Authorization Act (98
 Stat. 2646) (relating to the application of the remedy against the United
 States provided by sections 1346(c) and 2672 of title 28, United States
 Code, or by the Act of March 9, 1920, to any civil action for an injury,
 or death described in subsection (a)(1) of such section 1631) is repealed.
APPLICATION
 SEC. 4. (a) The period during which section 1631 of the Department of Defense
 Authorization Act (98 Stat. 2646) was in effect shall not be taken into
 account in computing the period provided in any Federal or State statute of
 limitations applicable to any civil action for an injury, loss of property,
 personal injury, or death described in subsection (a)(1) of such section.
 (b) If the period provided in any Federal or State statute of limitations
 applicable to a civil action referred to in subsection (a) expires within
 one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the action shall not
 be barred by such statute, but shall be forever barred if not commenced
 within one year after such date.