HR 1105 IH
101st CONGRESS
1st Session
 H. R. 1105
Relating to the establishment of reciprocity with respect to exports of
United States metallurgical coal and imports of foreign steel products.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
February 23, 1989
Mr. RAHALL introduced the following bill; which was referred to the Committee
on Ways and Means
A BILL
Relating to the establishment of reciprocity with respect to exports of
United States metallurgical coal and imports of foreign steel products.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Steel and Metallurgical Coal Trade Reciprocity
 Act of 1989'.
SEC. 2. AMENDMENTS TO STEEL STABILIZATION ACT.
 The Steel Import Stabilization Act (19 U.S.C. 2253 note) is amended by
 inserting after section 804 the following new section:
`SEC. 804A. ALLOCATION OF IMPORTS OF STEEL PRODUCTS UNDER BILATERAL
ARRANGEMENTS.
 `The quantity of articles in any steel product category that may be imported
 into, or exported to, the United States from any supplier nation or customs
 union under a bilateral arrangement during any period shall bear to the
 total quantity of articles in that category that may be imported into,
 or exported to, the United States during such period under all bilateral
 arrangements the same ratio that the quantity of United States metallurgical
 coal that was purchased by such supplier nation or customs union during the
 period beginning October 1, 1984, and ending September 30, 1989, bore to
 the total quantity of United States metallurgical coal that was purchased
 during such period by all suppliers of articles in that category subject to
 bilateral arrangements. The limitation imposed under this section applies
 to bilateral arrangements that take effect on or after October 1, 1989,
 and to extensions of bilateral arrangements entered into before such date
 to the extent that the extensions apply on or after such date.'.