S 1478 IS
102d CONGRESS
1st Session
S. 1478
To provide reasonable price enhancement to milk producers, greater milk price
stability, and minimum income protection to milk producers, to establish
certain minimum standards regarding milk solids, and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
July 16 (legislative day, JULY 8), 1991
Mr. KASTEN introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry
A BILL
To provide reasonable price enhancement to milk producers, greater milk price
stability, and minimum income protection to milk producers, to establish
certain minimum standards regarding milk solids, and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. MILK PRICE SUPPORT RATE ADJUSTMENTS AND PRODUCTION LEVELS.
 Section 204 of the Agricultural Act of 1949 (7 U.S.C. 1446e) is amended--
 (1) in subsection (b), by striking `$10.10' and inserting `$12.63';
 (2) by striking subsections (d) through (i);
 (3) by redesignating subsections (j) and (k) and subsections (f) and (g),
 respectively; and
 (4) by inserting after subsection (c) the following new subsections:
 `(d) Support Rate Adjustments-
 `(1) INCREASE- If the Secretary determines that the average all milk
 wholesale price received by producers in the United States is below the
 milk index for at least 120 consecutive days, the Secretary shall increase
 the rate of price support for milk to a rate that is equal to the cost of
 production of milk, as determined by the Secretary.
 `(2) DECREASE- If the Secretary increases the rate of price support for
 milk under paragraph (1) and subsequently determines that the average
 all milk wholesale price received by producers in the United States is at
 least 15 percent above the milk index for at least 120 consecutive days,
 the Secretary could decrease the rate of price support for milk to the
 rate prescribed under subsection (b).
 `(3) MILK INDEX- As used in this subsection, the term `milk index' means
 the cost of production of milk, as determined by the Secretary, adjusted by
 the Secretary on an annual basis to reflect changes during the preceding
 12 months in the Consumer Price Index for all-urban consumers published
 by the Department of Labor.
 `(e) Production Levels-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Secretary shall establish a production level for each
 farm that is owned or operated by producers who are actively engaged in
 the production of milk in the United States.
 `(2) Production levels for farms-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the
 production level for a dairy farm shall be equal to the greater of--
 `(i) the average volume of sales of milk produced on the farm during
 calendar years 1989 and 1990; or
 `(ii) the average volume of sales of milk produced on the farm during
 calendar years 1990 and 1991.
 `(B) NEW FARMS- If a production level cannot be established for a dairy farm
 under subparagraph (A) because the farm was not used for the production
 of milk during the relevant calendar years, the production level for the
 farm shall be determined by the Secretary.
 `(C) EQUITABLE ADJUSTMENTS- The Secretary may make equitable adjustments
 in the production level established for a dairy farm to reflect--
 `(i) hardships (such as fire, wind, or other Act of God) that would reduce
 the average volume of milk sales during a calendar year; or
 `(ii) other individual circumstances of the farm.
 `(3) TRANSFERS- If the producers on a dairy farm sell, lease, or otherwise
 transfer the dairy farm to a new owner or operator, the production level
 established for the farm shall be--
 `(A) transferred to the new owner or operator of the farm, if the new
 owner or operator continues to actively engage in the production of milk; or
 `(B) returned to the Secretary to be used to expand or establish the
 production level for existing or new dairy farms, if the new owner or
 operator does not continue to actively engage in the production of milk.
 `(4) Industry marketing board-
 `(A) ESTABLISHMENT- The Secretary shall establish an Industry Marketing
 Board (hereafter in this subsection referred to as the `Board') to advise
 the Secretary with respect to domestic and international programs conducted
 by the Secretary to reduce surplus domestic milk supplies, including the
 program established by this subsection.
 `(B) MEMBERSHIP- The Board shall consist of 18 members appointed by the
 Secretary to represent each of the seven regions of the United States
 established under subparagraph (C), of which--
 `(i) five members shall represent milk processors;
 `(ii) two members shall represent consumers; and
 `(iii) eleven members shall represent dairy producers.
 `(C) REGIONS- To carry out subparagraph (B), the Secretary shall establish
 seven regions of the United States that produce, to the extent practicable,
 equal quantities of milk.
 `(D) CONSULTATION- The Secretary shall consult with the Board in carrying
 out this subsection.
 `(5) Production level for united states-
 `(A) SUPPLY AND DEMAND- Not later than January 1 of each year, the Secretary
 shall estimate--
 `(i) the total supply of milk that would be produced in the United States
 during the year, but for the operation of this subsection; and
 `(ii) the total demand for milk produced in the United States during the
 year, including milk needed for commercial uses, domestic and foreign food
 program requirements, and dairy exports.
 `(B) MILK PRODUCTION PERCENTAGES- Based on the estimates and subject to
 subparagraph (C), the Secretary shall determine--
 `(i) a necessary milk production percentage, which is equal to the
 percentage of the total supply of milk estimated under subparagraph (A)(i)
 that the Secretary determines is necessary to meet the total demand for
 milk estimated under subparagraph (A)(ii); and
 `(ii) a surplus milk production percentage, which is equal to the percentage
 of the total supply of milk estimated under subparagraph (A)(i) that the
 Secretary determines is not necessary to meet the total demand for milk
 estimated under subparagraph (A)(ii).
 `(C) LIMITATION- In carrying out subparagraph (B), the Secretary shall
 not reduce the total necessary supply of milk determined for a year by
 more than 10 percent from the total necessary supply of milk determined
 for the previous year.
 `(6) NECESSARY AND SURPLUS MARKETINGS-
 `(A) RATE OF PRICE SUPPORT FOR NECESSARY MARKETINGS- In the case of the
 quantity of milk produced on a dairy farm that is equal to the production
 level established for the farm multiplied by the necessary milk production
 percentage established under subparagraph (5)(B)(i), the rate of price
 support for the milk shall be equal to the market price for the milk,
 as determined by the Secretary.
 `(B) RATE OF PRICE SUPPORT FOR SURPLUS MARKETINGS- In the case of the
 quantity of milk produced on a dairy farm that is equal to the production
 level established for the farm multiplied by the surplus milk production
 percentage established under subparagraph (5)(B)(ii), the rate of price
 support for the milk shall be equal to--
 `(i) the world market price for milk, as determined by the Secretary; less
 `(ii) the cost to the Commodity Credit Corporation for disposal of surplus
 milk and milk products, as determined by the Secretary.
 `(C) MONTHLY COMPARISON- To carry out this subsection, the Secretary shall
 compare on at least a monthly basis--
 `(i) the volume of sales of milk produced on each dairy farm; and
 `(ii) the production level established for the farm.
 `(D) PAYMENTS BY HANDLERS- In the case of surplus milk (as described in
 subparagraph (B)) that is subject to an order issued pursuant to section
 8c of the Agricultural Adjustment Act (7 U.S.C. 608c), reenacted with
 amendments by the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937, payments by
 handlers under such section 8c(5)(A) shall reflect the difference between--
 `(i) the world market price for milk, as determined by the Secretary; less
 `(ii) the cost to the Commodity Credit Corporation for disposal of surplus
 milk and milk products, as determined by the Secretary.
 `(7) Disposal of surplus milk and milk products-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Surplus milk and milk products acquired by the Commodity
 Credit Corporation in carrying out this subsection may be exported or
 sold for food programs only to the extent that the surplus milk and milk
 products exceed normal food purchases.
 `(B) BIDS- Dairy cooperatives, dairy companies, exporters, and other
 persons may submit a bid to the Secretary to acquire surplus cheese,
 butter, or nonfat dry milk held by the Commodity Credit Corporation.'.
SEC. 2. SOLIDS CONTENTS OF BEVERAGE MILK.
 Section 8c(5) of the Agricultural Adjustment Act (7 U.S.C. 608c(5)),
 reenacted with amendments by the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of
 1937, is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
 `(M)(i) Providing that--
 `(I) all milk that is in final package form for beverage use shall contain
 not less than 8.7 percent milk solids not fat;
 `(II) all lowfat milk that is in final package form for beverage use shall
 contain not less than 10 percent milk solids not fat; and
 `(III) all skim milk that is in final package form for beverage use shall
 contain not less than 9 percent milk solids not fat.
 `(ii) As used in this paragraph, the term `milk' means sweet milk of cows.'.