S 3238 IS
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
S. 3238
To prevent potential abuses of electronic monitoring in the workplace,
and for other purposes.
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
September 16 (legislative day, SEPTEMBER 8), 1992
Mr. SIMON introduced the following bill; which was read twice and referred
to the Committee on Labor and Human Resources
A BILL
To prevent potential abuses of electronic monitoring in the workplace,
and for other purposes.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
 This Act may be cited as the `Privacy for Consumers and Workers Act'.
SEC. 2. DEFINITIONS.
 As used in this Act:
 (1) ELECTRONIC MONITORING-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subparagraph (C), the term
 `electronic monitoring' means the collection, storage, analysis, or
 reporting of information concerning an employee's activities by means
 of a computer, electronic observation and supervision, telephone service
 observation, telephone call accounting, or other form of visual, auditory,
 or computer-based technology which is conducted by any method other than
 direct observation by another person, including the following methods:
 Transfer of signs, signals, writing, images, sounds, data, or intelligence
 of any nature which are transmitted in whole or in part by a wire, radio,
 electromagnetic, photoelectronic, or photo-optical system.
 (B) TELEPHONE CALL ACCOUNTING- For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term
 `telephone call accounting' means the practice of recording the telephone
 numbers called by a specific telephone or group of telephones, including--
 (i) the telephone number from which a call is being made,
 (ii) the telephone number which is being called,
 (iii) the time when the telephone call was connected,
 (iv) the time when the telephone call was completed, and
 (v) identification of the operator, if any, who assisted in placing the
 telephone call,
for the purpose of individual employee evaluations or the setting of production
quotas or work performance expectations.
 (C) EXCLUSION- The term `electronic monitoring' does not include--
 (i) wiretapping, or
 (ii) the electronic transfer of--
 (I) payroll data,
 (II) insurance and other benefit data,
 (III) employee job application data, or
 (IV) other personnel-related data which an employer may collect under
 section 5(a),
for administrative purposes only.
 (2) EMPLOYEE- The term `employee' means any current or former employee of
 an employer and any leased employee.
 (3) EMPLOYER- The term `employer' means any person who--
 (A) is engaged in commerce, and
 (B) who employs employees,
and includes any individual, corporation, partnership, labor organization,
unincorporated association, or any other legal business, the Federal
Government, any State (or political subdivision thereof), and any agent of
the employer.
 (4) PERSONAL DATA- The term `personal data' means any information
 concerning an employee which, because of name, identifying number, mark,
 or description, can be readily associated with a particular individual,
 and such term includes information contained in printouts, forms, or
 written analyses or evaluations.
 (5) PROSPECTIVE EMPLOYEE- The term `prospective employee' means an individual
 who has applied for a position of employment with an employer.
 (6) TELEPHONE SERVICE OBSERVATION- The term `telephone service observation'
 means the practice of listening to or recording telephone calls being made
 by, or received by, an employee in order to monitor the quality of service
 provided by the employee.
 (7) SECRETARY- The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Labor.
SEC. 3. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) ENGAGING IN ELECTRONIC MONITORING- An employer may engage in electronic
 monitoring of the employer's employees if--
 (1) the employer provides the notices required by section 4,
 (2) if section 5 applies, the employer complies with the requirements of
 such section,
 (3) the employer complies with subsections (a) and (c) of section 9, and
 (4) the employer does not violate section 10.
 (b) REVIEW AND USE- An employer may review data obtained by electronic
 monitoring of the employer's employees if the employer meets the requirements
 of section 6 and may use such data if the employer meets the requirements
 of section 8.
SEC. 4. GENERAL NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) SECRETARY'S NOTICE- The Secretary shall prepare, have printed, and
 distribute to employers a notice which will inform employees--
 (A) that an employer engages in or may engage in electronic monitoring of
 employees and specifies the circumstances (including the monitoring and
 exception described in section 5) under which an employee is or is not
 entitled to additional notice under this section, and
 (B) of the rights and protections provided to employees by this Act.
Each employer who engages in electronic monitoring shall post and maintain
such notice in conspicuous places on its premises where notices to employees
are customarily posted.
 (2) EMPLOYER'S SPECIFIC NOTICE- Each employer shall provide to each employee
 who will be electronically monitored with prior written notice describing
 the following regarding the electronic monitoring of such employees:
 (A) The forms of electronic monitoring to be used.
 (B) The personal data to be collected.
 (C) The hours and days per week that electronic monitoring will occur.
 (D) The use to be made of personal data collected.
 (E) Interpretation of printouts of statistics or other records of information
 collected through electronic monitoring if the interpretation affects
 the employees.
 (F) Existing production standards and work performance expectations.
 (G) Methods for determining production standards and work performance
 expectations based on electronic monitoring statistics if the methods
 affect the employees.
The notice required by this paragraph shall also include a description of
the monitoring and the exception which is authorized under section 5(c)(1)
to be undertaken without providing such notice.
 (3) EMPLOYER'S NOTICE TO PROSPECTIVE EMPLOYEES-
 (A) IN GENERAL- Each employer shall notify a prospective employee at
 the first personal interview of existing forms of electronic monitoring
 conducted by the employer which may affect the prospective employee if
 such employee is hired by the employer.
 (B) SPECIFIC NOTICE- Each employer, upon request by a prospective employee or
 when the employer offers employment to a prospective employee, shall provide
 the prospective employee with the written notice described in paragraph (2).
 (4) CUSTOMER NOTICE- If an employer engages in telephone service observation,
 the employer shall prominently place in each of its written advertisements
 and in each of its customer bills a statement that the employer is engaging
 in such observation.
 (5) PUBLIC NOTICE- If an employer engages in electronic monitoring of
 members of the public who are not customers of the employer, the employer
 shall notify such individuals of such monitoring. Such notice may take the
 form that is reasonably calculated to reach members of the public who may
 be affected.
SEC. 5. PERIODIC OR RANDOM ELECTRONIC MONITORING.
 (a) GENERAL RULE- No employer may engage in electronic monitoring of any of
 the employer's employees on a periodic or random basis except as authorized
 by subsection (b)
 (b) AUTHORITY-
 (1) NEW EMPLOYEES- An employer may engage in random and periodic monitoring
 of an employee if the cumulative total period of such employee's employment
 is not more than 60 days.
 (2) OTHER EMPLOYEES- An employer may not engage in random and periodic
 monitoring of an employee with a cumulative employment period of at least
 5 years.
 (3) WORK GROUPS- An employer may engage in electronic monitoring of a work
 group of employees on a periodic or random basis for not more than 2 hours
 in any week. Except as provided in subsection (b), the section 4(a)(2)
 notice to each employee within such work group for such monitoring shall
 be provided at least 24 hours but not more than 72 hours before engaging
 in such monitoring. For purposes of this subsection, the term `work group'
 means a group of employees employed in a single facility and engaged in
 substantially similar work at a common time and in physical proximity to
 each other.
 (c) EXCEPTION TO NOTICE REQUIREMENT-
 (1) SPECIAL MONITORING- Subject to paragraph (2), if an employer has a
 reasonable suspicion that any employee is engaged in conduct which--
 (A) violates criminal or civil law, and
 (B) adversely affects the employer's interests or the interests of such
 employer's employees,
the employer may engage, on the employer's worksite, in electronic monitoring
of such employee or of an area in which the actions described in subparagraphs
(A) and (B) occur without providing the notice required by section 4(a)(2)
and without regard to subsection (a), (c) or (d) of section 9.
 (2) STATEMENT- Before engaging in the electronic monitoring described in
 paragraph (1), an employer shall execute a statement setting forth--
 (A) with particularity the conduct which is being monitored and the basis
 for the monitoring, and
 (B) an identification of the specific economic loss or injury to the
 business of the employer resulting from such conduct or the injury to the
 interests of such employer's employees.
The employer shall sign the statement and retain it for 3 years from the date
the monitoring began or until judgment is rendered in an action brought under
section 11(c) by an employee affected by such monitoring, whichever is later.
SEC. 6. REVIEW OF CONTINUOUS ELECTRONIC MONITORING.
 (a) REVIEW DURING MONITORING-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), no employer may
 review data, obtained by continuous electronic monitoring of the employer's
 employees, on a periodic or random basis.
 (2) EXCEPTION- The review of electronic data obtained from the use of an
 electronic card system and the review of data which is continuously monitored
 by an employer and which appears simultaneously on multiple television
 screens or sequentially on a single screen are not subject to paragraph (1).
 (b) REVIEW AFTER MONITORING- An employer may review data obtained by
 continuous electronic monitoring of the employer's employees after the
 monitoring was completed only if review was limited to specific data which
 the employer has reason to believe contains information relevant to an
 employee's work.
SEC. 7. EMPLOYEE REVIEW OF RECORDS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (b), each employer
 shall provide an employee (or the employee's authorized agent) with an
 opportunity to review all personal data obtained by electronic monitoring
 of the employee.
 (b) EXCEPTION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), an employer is not
 required to provide an employee an opportunity to review data which are
 obtained by electronic monitoring described in section 5(c)(1).
 (2) REVIEW PERMITTED- If--
 (A) the investigation by an employer with respect to which electronic
 monitoring described in section 5(c)(1) was conducted on an employee has
 been completed, or
 (B) disciplinary action has been taken by an employer against the employee
 who was the subject of such electronic monitoring,
whichever occurs first, such employer shall promptly provide such employee
with an opportunity to review the personal data obtained from such electronic
monitoring.
SEC. 8. USE OF DATA COLLECTED BY ELECTRONIC MONITORING.
 (a) EMPLOYER ACTIONS- An employer shall not take any action against an
 employee on the basis of personal data obtained by electronic monitoring
 of such employee unless the employer has complied with the requirements
 of this Act with respect to the monitoring of such employee.
 (b) DATA SHALL NOT BE USED AS SOLE BASIS FOR EVALUATION OR PRODUCTION QUOTAS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), an employer shall
 not use quantitative data on an employee which is obtained by electronic
 monitoring and which records the amount of work performed by such employee
 within a specific time as the sole basis for--
 (A) individual employee performance evaluation, or
 (B) setting production quotas or work performance expectations.
 (2) EXCEPTION- If an employee is not working at a facility of an employer
 and transmits the employee's work to the employer electronically, such
 employer may use the quantitative data described in paragraph (1) for the
 purposes described in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) if such
 data is the only basis available to such employer for such purposes.
 (c) FIRST AMENDMENT RIGHTS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- An employer shall not intentionally use or disseminate
 personal data obtained by electronic monitoring of an employee when the
 employee is exercising First Amendment rights.
 (2) EXCEPTION- Electronic monitoring by an employer whose purpose and
 principal effect is to collect data about the work of an employee of
 the employer is not prohibited by paragraph (1) because it collects some
 incidental data concerning the exercise of an employee's First Amendment
 rights.
SEC. 9. PRIVACY PROTECTIONS.
 (a) COLLECTION-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), no employer may
 intentionally collect personal data about an employee through electronic
 monitoring if the data are not confined to the employee's work.
 (2) EXCEPTION- Electronic monitoring by an employer whose purpose and
 principal effect is to collect data about the work of an employee or to
 collect data on subjects who are not employees of the employer is not
 prohibited by paragraph (1) because it collects data which is not confined
 to such employee's work.
 (b) DISCLOSURE LIMITATIONS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), an employer shall not
 disclose personal data obtained by electronic monitoring to any person
 or business entity except to (or with the prior written consent of)
 the individual employee to whom the data pertain, unless the disclosure
 would be--
 (A) to officers and employees of the employer who have a legitimate need
 for the information in the performance of their duties;
 (B) to a law enforcement agency in connection with an investigation or
 prosecution; or
 (C) pursuant to the order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
 (2) EXCEPTION- An employer may disclose to the public personal data obtained
 by electronic monitoring of an employee if the data contain evidence of
 illegal conduct by a public official or have a direct and substantial
 effect on public health or safety.
 (c) PRIVATE AREAS- No employer may engage in electronic monitoring in--
 (1) bathrooms,
 (2) locker rooms, or
 (3) dressing rooms,
except that if the employer has a reasonable suspicion that an employee is
engaged in conduct which violates criminal law and which adversely affects
the employer's interests or the interests of such employer's employees,
the employer may engage in electronic monitoring of such employee in a
place described in paragraph (1), (2), or (3) if the employer executes,
in accordance with section 5(c)(2), the statement required by such section.
SEC. 10. PROHIBITIONS.
 No employer may--
 (1) violate any requirement of this Act,
 (2) engage in video monitoring with a video camera which is not visible to
 the subject of the monitoring, except in the case of monitoring described
 in section 5(c)(1), 12(a), or 12(b),
 (3) interfere with, or deny the exercise or the attempted exercise by,
 an employee of any right provided by section 8(c), or
 (4) discharge, discipline, or in any manner discriminate against an
 employee with respect to the employee's compensation or terms, conditions,
 or privileges of employment because the employee (or any person acting
 pursuant to a request of the employee) has--
 (A) instituted any proceeding relating to a violation of this Act,
 (B) has testified or is about to testify in any such proceedings, or
 (C) disclosed information which the employee reasonably believes evidences
 a violation of this Act.
SEC. 11. ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS.
 (a) CIVIL PENALTIES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraph (2), any employer who violates any
 provision of this Act may be assessed a civil penalty of not more than
 $10,000 for each such violation.
 (2) CONSIDERATIONS- In determining the amount of any penalty under paragraph
 (1), the Secretary shall take into account the previous record of the
 person in terms of compliance with this Act and the gravity of the violation.
 (3) ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION- Any civil penalty under this subsection shall
 be assessed by the Secretary and shall be collected in the same manner as
 is required by subsections (b) through (e) of section 503 of the Migrant
 and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act (29 U.S.C. 1853) with
 respect to civil penalties assessed under subsection (a) of such section.
 (b) ACTIONS BY THE SECRETARY- The Secretary may bring an action under this
 section to restrain violations of this Act. The Solicitor of Labor may
 appear for and represent the Secretary in any litigation brought under this
 Act. In any action brought under this section, the district courts of the
 United States shall have jurisdiction, for cause shown, to issue temporary
 or permanent restraining orders and injunctions to require compliance
 with this Act, including such legal or equitable relief incident thereto
 as may be appropriate, including employment, reinstatement, promotion,
 and the payment of lost wages and benefits.
 (c) PRIVATE CIVIL ACTIONS-
 (1) IN GENERAL- An employer who violates this Act shall be liable to the
 employee or prospective employee affected by such violation. Such employer
 shall be liable for such legal or equitable relief as may be appropriate,
 including employment, reinstatement, promotion, and the payment of lost
 wages and benefits.
 (2) JURISDICTION- An action to recover the liability prescribed in paragraph
 (1) may be maintained against the employer in any Federal or State court
 of competent jurisdiction by any person for or on behalf of an employee
 or prospective employee.
 (3) LIMITATION- No such action may be commenced more than 3 years after
 the date--
 (A) the employee knew of, or
 (B) the employee could reasonably be expected to know of,
the alleged violation.
 (4) COSTS- The court shall allow the prevailing party (other than the
 United States) reasonable costs, including attorney's fees.
 (d) WAIVER OF RIGHTS PROHIBITED- The rights and procedures provided by
 this Act may not be waived by contract or otherwise, unless such waiver
 is part of a written settlement agreed to and signed by the parties to a
 pending action or complaint under this Act.
SEC. 12. APPLICATION.
 (a) LAW ENFORCEMENT- This Act shall not apply to electronic monitoring
 administered by law enforcement agencies as may otherwise be permitted in
 criminal investigations.
 (b) WORKSITE- This Act shall not apply to electronic monitoring conducted
 by employers in connection with the investigation of a workers compensation
 claim involving at least $25,000.
 (c) REQUIRED MONITORING- This Act (other than sections 4(a)(1)(A),
 4(a)(2)(A), (B) and (D), 7, 8(c), 9(a)(1), 9(b), 9(c), and 10) shall not
 apply to electronic monitoring--
 (1) conducted by an employer pursuant to Federal law (including regulations)
 governing public safety or security for public transportation,
 (2) conducted by or for--
 (A) the intelligence community, as defined in Executive Order 12333 (or
 successor order), or
 (B) intelligence community contractors with respect to contracts that bear
 upon national security information, as defined by Executive Order 12356
 (or successor order),
 (3) conducted by an employer or a person associated with an employer
 registered under section 6, 15, 15A, 15B, 15C, or 17A of the Securities
 Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78 et seq.), section 8(a) of the Investment
 Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-1(a)), or sections 202(a)(11) and
 203(a) of the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80b-2(a)(11)
 and 80b-3(a)), conducted by an employer or a person associated with an
 employer registered or exempt from such registration under sections 4d,
 4e, 4k, or 4m of the Commodity Exchange Act (7 U.S.C. 6d, 6e, 6k, or 6m),
 conducted by a self-regulatory organization or its affiliated clearinghouse
 designated, registered, or exempt from registration under section 6 or 17
 of such Act (7 U.S.C. 8, 21), or conducted by an employer who provides an
 electronic trading system or other facilities for one or more self-regulatory
 organizations designated, registered, or exempt from registration under
 section 6 or 17 of such Act (7 U.S.C. 8, 21), as long as such monitoring is
 confined to management or professional employees with significant financial
 responsibility which involved the use of independent judgment,
 (4) conducted by an employer that is a financial institution, as defined
 in section 20 of title 18, United States Code or subparagraph (A), (B),
 (C), (D), or (F) of section 5312(a)(2) of title 31, United States Code,
 as long as such monitoring is confined to management or professional
 employees with significant financial responsibility which involved the
 use of independent judgment, or
 (5) conducted only to the extent necessary to ensure an employee provides
 the notices required by the Truth in Lending Act and the regulation under
 such Act designated Regulation Z, the Equal Credit Opportunity Act and the
 regulation under such Act designated Regulation B, the Fair Credit Reporting
 Act, the Fair Credit Billing Act, the Fair Debt Collection Practices
 Act, the rule of the Federal Trade Commission on credit practices, the
 regulations and consent orders of the Federal Trade Commission on unfair
 acts and practices, the Telephone Consumer Protection Act of 1991 and
 regulations under such Act, and all corresponding State laws and regulations.
 (c) THIRD PARTY-
 (1) MONITORING FOR ANOTHER PERSON- A person who engages in electronic
 monitoring may not perform electronic monitoring for another person unless
 the requirements of this Act are complied with.
 (2) USE OF DATA- A person who contracts with or otherwise obtains the
 services of a third party to electronically monitor the employees of
 such person may not use the data obtained from such monitoring unless the
 requirements of this Act are complied with.
SEC. 13. REGULATIONS.
 The Secretary shall, within 6 months after the date of the enactment of
 this Act, issue regulations to carry out this Act.
SEC. 14. PREEMPTION.
 This Act shall not be construed to restrict, limit, or eliminate a
 requirement of a State or political subdivision of a State or of a
 collective bargaining agreement relating to electronic monitoring which
 is more stringent than any requirement of this Act.
SEC. 15. COVERAGE OF EMPLOYEES OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES AND SENATE.
 (a) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this section--
 (1) the term `employee' means any current, prospective, or former employee
 of an employing authority or any leased employee;
 (2) the term `employing authority'--
 (A) has the meaning given it in the Fair Employment Practices Resolution,
 except that with respect to a position on the minority staff of a committee,
 such term means the ranking minority member of such committee; and
 (B) includes Senate employees as defined in section 301(c)(1) of the Civil
 Rights Act of 1991; and
 (3) the term `Fair Employment Practices Resolution' means--
 (A) House Resolution 558 of the One Hundredth Congress, as adopted October
 4, 1988, and incorporated into Rule LI of the Rules of the House of
 Representatives of the One Hundred Second Congress; or
 (B) any other provision that continues in effect the provisions of such
 resolution.
 (b) APPLICATION- With the exception of section 11, this Act (including the
 substantive requirements of implementing regulations issued under section
 13) shall apply to employees and to employing authorities.
 (c) ADMINISTRATION-
 (1) HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES- The remedies and procedures of the Fair
 Employment Practices Resolution shall apply with respect to a violation
 of this Act as it is made applicable by subsection (b) to employees of
 the employing authorities described in subsection (a)(2)(A). The Office
 of Fair Employment Practices may, in addition to those remedies available
 under the Fair Employment Practices Resolution, assess such an employing
 authority a civil penalty of not more than $10,000 for each violation. In
 determining the amount, the Office shall take into account the previous
 record of the employing authority involved in terms of compliance with
 this section and the gravity of the violation. Any such penalty collected
 shall be paid into the Treasury of the United States.
 (2) SENATE- The remedies and procedures utilized by the Office of Senate
 Fair Employment Practices shall apply with respect to a violation of this
 Act as it is made applicable by subsection (b) to employees of the employing
 authorities described in subsection (a)(2)(B). The Office of Senate Fair
 Employment Practices may, in addition to those remedies otherwise available,
 assess such an employing authority a civil penalty of not more than $10,000
 for each violation. In determining the amount, the Office shall take into
 account the previous record of the employing authority involved in terms
 of compliance with this section and the gravity of the violation. Any such
 penalty collected shall be paid into the Treasury of the United States.
 (d) WAIVER OF RIGHTS PROHIBITED- The rights and procedures provided by
 this Act may not be waived by contract or otherwise, unless such waiver
 is part of a written settlement agreed to and signed by the parties to a
 pending action or complaint under this Act.
 (e) NOTICE- Each employing authority shall post and keep posted in
 conspicuous places on its premises a notice that shall be--
 (1) with respect to the employing authorities described in subsection
 (a)(2)(A), prepared by the Office of Fair Employment Practices; and
 (1) with respect to the employing authorities described in subsection
 (a)(2)(B), prepared by the Office of Senate Fair Employment Practices;
setting forth such information as each such Office considers to be appropriate
to carry out this section. Such notice, at a minimum, shall provide the same
information as that required under section 4(a)(1).
 (f) RULEMAKING- Subsection (c) is enacted as an exercise of the rulemaking
 power of the House of Representatives and the Senate, respectively, with
 full recognition of the right of the House of Representatives and the
 Senate to change its rules in the same manner, and to the same extent,
 as in any other rule of the House of Representatives and the Senate.
 (g) ENFORCEMENT- Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, no officer
 or employee of the executive branch of the Federal Government shall have
 authority to administer, interpret, or enforce this section.
SEC. 16. EFFECTIVE DATE.
 This Act shall take effect on 6 months after the date of the enactment of
 this Act, except that an employer who is engaged in electronic monitoring
 on the expiration of such 6 months shall have 60 days after such expiration
 to provide each affected employee with the notice required by this Act.