HR 3535 SC
102d CONGRESS
2d Session
 H. R. 3535
To amend the Social Security Act to ensure, through a USHealth Program and
through qualified employer health plans, access for all Americans to benefits
for high quality health care and long-term care while containing the costs
of the health care system.
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
October 9, 1991
Mr. ROYBAL introduced the following bill; which was referred jointly to the
Committees on Ways and Means, Energy and Commerce, and Education and Labor
February 6, 1992
Additional sponsors: Ms. OAKAR, Mr. FORD of Tennessee, Mr. ORTIZ, Ms. NORTON,
Mr. TORRES, Mr. PASTOR, Mr. DE LA GARZA, Mr. SERRANO, Mr. BUSTAMANTE,
Mr. BLAZ, and Mr. SAVAGE
A BILL
To amend the Social Security Act to ensure, through a USHealth Program and
through qualified employer health plans, access for all Americans to benefits
for high quality health care and long-term care while containing the costs
of the health care system.
 Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
 States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
 (a) SHORT TITLE- This Act may be cited as the `USHealth Program Act of 1991'.
 (b) TABLE OF CONTENTS- The table of contents of this Act is as follows:
Sec. 1. Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--PROVISION AND EXPANSION OF HOSPITAL, MEDICAL, AND PREVENTIVE SERVICES
TO COVER ALL AMERICANS EITHER THROUGH A USHEALTH PROGRAM OR QUALIFIED EMPLOYER
HEALTH PLANS
Subtitle A--Coverage of Elderly, Disabled, Retired, and Other Non-Employed
Individuals Through a USHealth Program
PART 1--ELIGIBILITY
Sec. 101. Eligibility.
Sec. 102. Transitional medicaid coverage of pregnant women and infants up
to 185 percent of poverty level.
PART 2--BENEFITS
Sec. 111. Description of benefits.
Sec. 112. Changes in exclusions.
Sec. 113. Elimination of all mandatory benefits under medicaid program.
PART 3--PAYMENTS FOR SERVICES
Sec. 121. No coinsurance for inpatient hospital services; application of
unified annual deductible.
Sec. 122. Payments for medical and other health services generally.
Sec. 123. Payment for covered outpatient drugs and home intravenous drug
therapy.
Sec. 124. Protection against catastrophic out-of-pocket expenses.
Sec. 125. Adjustments in payments for inpatient hospital services and
physicians' services to reflect change in population served and other special
circumstances.
Sec. 126. Equalizing payment for outpatient mental health services.
Subtitle B--Coverage of Employed Individuals Through Qualified Employer
Health Plans
PART 1--GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 151. Employment-based health insurance coverage.
`TITLE XXI--ACCESS TO HEALTH INSURANCE FOR HEALTH SERVICES THROUGH EMPLOYMENT
`Part A--Employer Requirement to Enroll Employees and Families in a Qualified
Employer Health Plan or in USHealth Program
`Sec. 2101. Application to full-time employees.
`Sec. 2102. Application to part-time employees.
`Sec. 2103. Application to seasonal and temporary employees.
`Sec. 2104. Treatment of all family members as a unit.
`Sec. 2105. Meeting requirement of enrollment in qualified employer health
plan through enrollment in USHealth Program.
`Sec. 2106. Application of requirement to employers of different sizes.
`Sec. 2107. Timing of enrollment; period of coverage.
`Sec. 2108. Enforcement.
`Part B--Requirements for Qualified Employer Health Plans
`Sec. 2121. Qualified employer health plan and covered employer health
plan defined.
`Sec. 2122. Requirements relating to employee premiums and cost-sharing.
`Sec. 2123. Option of election of USHealth program rules.
`Part C--Standards for Qualified Health Plans
`Sec. 2151. Certification of qualified health plans.
`Sec. 2152. Treatment of family as a unit; coverage period; health plan cards.
`Sec. 2153. Requirements respecting basic benefits.
`Sec. 2154. Requirements respecting limits on preexisting condition exclusions
and coverage standards for required health services.
`Sec. 2155. Requirements respecting limits on cost-sharing.
`Sec. 2156. Payment rates.
`Sec. 2157. Coordination and portability of health coverage under qualified
health plans.
`Sec. 2158. Consumer protections.
`Sec. 2159. Preemption of certain State and Federal requirements.
`Part D--Definitions and Miscellaneous
`Sec. 2181. Definitions.
Sec. 152. Deduction for health insurance costs of self-employed.
PART 2--INSURANCE REFORM
Subpart A--General Reforms
Sec. 171. General reforms.
`TITLE XXVII--GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE STANDARDS
`Part 1--General Standards; Definitions
`Sec. 2701. Application of requirements to employment-related health plans.
`Sec. 2702. Establishment of standards.
`Sec. 2703. Definitions.
`Part 2--Employer Health Insurance Reform
`Sec. 2710. No discrimination based on health status or pre-existing
conditions.
`Sec. 2711. Enrollment practice and guaranteed renewability requirements
for employer health plans.
`Sec. 2712. Rating practices for employer health plans.
`Sec. 2713. Basic benefit package for employer health plans.
`Sec. 2714. Miscellaneous disclosure and record-keeping requirements for
employer health plans.
Subpart B--Encouraging Establishment of Managed Care
Sec. 181. Favorable treatment of network plans and utilization review programs.
`Part 3--Favorable Treatment of Network Plans and Utilization Review Programs
`Sec. 2731. Favorable treatment of network plans.
`Sec. 2732. Favorable treatment of utilization review programs.
Subpart C--Repeal of COBRA Continuation Requirements
Sec. 191. Repeal of COBRA continuation requirements.
TITLE II--PROVISION OF LONG-TERM HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED CARE, NURSING HOME
CARE, AND OTHER BENEFITS FOR ALL AMERICANS THROUGH THE USHEALTH PROGRAM
Sec. 131. Long-term care protection and certain preventive benefits.
`Part B--Long-Term Care Protection and Certain Preventive Benefits
`Subpart 1--Long-Term Care Protection
`Sec. 1831. Eligibility.
`Sec. 1832. Long-term care benefits.
`Sec. 1833. Long-term care agencies.
`Sec. 1834. Qualified service providers.
`Sec. 1835. Payment for home and community-based services.
`Sec. 1836. Payment for nursing facility services.
`Sec. 1837. Certification.
`Sec. 1838. Home and community-based care advisory council.
`Sec. 1839. Home and community-based care quality assurance.
`Sec. 1840. Definitions.
`Subpart 2--Certain Preventive Benefits
`Sec. 1840A. Eligibility.
`Sec. 1840B. Certain preventive benefits.
`Sec. 1840C. Payment for benefits.
`Sec. 1840D. General provisions.
Sec. 202. Grants for training for home and community-based care.
Sec. 203. Grants for home health aides.
Sec. 204. Grants for model consumer training programs.
Sec. 205. Centers for long-term care planning and technical assistance.
Sec. 206. Demonstration projects for seriously mentally ill individuals.
TITLE III--LOW-INCOME ASSISTANCE
Sec. 301. Assistance for low-income individuals.
`Part C--Assistance for Low-Income Individuals
`Sec. 1841. Assistance for individuals enrolled under part A.
`Sec. 1842. Assistance for individuals enrolled under qualified employer
health plans.
`Sec. 1843. Assistance for individuals entitled to benefits under part B.
`Sec. 1844. Applications for assistance.
`Sec. 1845. Reconciliation of premium assistance through income statements.
`Sec. 1846. Treatment of certain cash assistance recipients.
`Sec. 1847. Computation of family adjusted total income.
TITLE IV--USHEALTH PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION
Subtitle A--USHealth Administration
Sec. 401. Establishment of USHealth Administration as a separate, independent
agency; responsibilities of the agency.
`Part D--USHealth Administration
`Sec. 1851. USHealth administration.
`Sec. 1852. USHealth Board; USHealth Administrator; other officers.
`Sec. 1853. Administrative duties of the USHealth Board.
`Sec. 1854. Reports.
Sec. 402. Transfers to the new USHealth Administration.
Sec. 403. Transitional rules.
Sec. 404. Conforming amendments to the social security act and related
provisions.
Sec. 405. Rules of construction.
Subtitle B--Miscellaneous
Sec. 411. Use of intermediaries and carriers.
Sec. 412. Additional administrative provisions relating to covered outpatient
drugs.
Sec. 413. Provisions relating to intravenous drug therapy services.
Sec. 414. Changes in HMO coverage and payment.
Sec. 415. Special rules for frail elderly demonstration projects and similar
projects.
TITLE V--QUALITY ASSURANCE AND COST CONTAINMENT
Subtitle A--Quality Assurance
Sec. 501. Emphasis by peer review organizations on quality assurance.
Sec. 502. Licensure and certification requirement.
Sec. 503. Quality assurance boards.
Sec. 504. Consumers' bill of rights.
Sec. 505. Additional quality assurance provisions for long-term care.
Sec. 506. Hospital discharge planning process.
Sec. 507. Assuring pre-paid organizations provide quality, accessible mental
health services.
Subtitle B--Cost Containment
Sec. 511. Specification of overall health care spending amounts; adjustment
of payment rates.
TITLE VI--FINANCING
Sec. 601. Premiums; collection of premiums.
Sec. 602. Elimination of limit on wages or self-employment income subject
to FICA and railroad retirement taxes.
Sec. 603. Increase in health insurance tax rate.
Sec. 604. State maintenance of effort payments.
Sec. 605. USHealth Program Trust Fund.
TITLE VII--RURAL AND CENTRAL CITY DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS AND EXPANSION OF
PRIMARY CARE AND PUBLIC HEALTH DELIVERY CAPACITY
Sec. 701. Additional rural and central city health care research and
demonstrations.
Sec. 702. Extension of authorizations for primary care and public health
programs through the year 2000.
Sec. 703. Expanding primary care and public health delivery capacity.
Sec. 704. Annual report on impact of Act in meeting goals and objectives
stated in `Healthy People, 2000'.
TITLE I--PROVISION AND EXPANSION OF HOSPITAL, MEDICAL, AND PREVENTIVE SERVICES
TO COVER ALL AMERICANS EITHER THROUGH A USHEALTH PROGRAM OR QUALIFIED EMPLOYER
HEALTH PLANS
Subtitle A--Coverage of Elderly, Disabled, Retired, and Other Non-Employed
Individuals Through a USHealth Program
PART 1--ELIGIBILITY
SEC. 101. ELIGIBILITY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Title XVIII of the Social Security Act is amended by
 inserting after section 1804 the following new sections:
`DESCRIPTION OF USHEALTH PROGRAM
 `SEC. 1805. The USHealth Program provides--
 `(1) health insurance benefits under part A for all permanent residents
 in the United States not covered by employer health insurance;
 `(2) long-term care under subpart 1 of part B for all permanent residents
 in the United States, without regard to age or disability status;
 `(3) certain preventive benefits under subpart 2 of part B for all permanent
 residents in the United States; and
 `(4) low-income assistance under part C for health insurance benefits and
 long-term care benefits.
`ELIGIBILITY AND ENTITLEMENT
 `SEC. 1806. (a) ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS-
 `(1) Part a health insurance benefits-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subparagraph (B), each of the
 following individuals is eligible for health insurance benefits under part A:
 `(i) Each citizen or national of the United States.
 `(ii) Each alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence or otherwise
 permanently residing in the United States under color of law, including
 aliens lawfully admitted for temporary residence under section 210 or 245A
 of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
 `(iii) Each alien admitted to the United States as an officer or employee
 (or member of the immediate family of such officer or employee)--
 `(I) of a foreign government or an instrumentality of a foreign government,
 or
 `(II) of an international organization (as such term is defined in the
 International Organizations Immunities Act),
if the government or organization, respectively, has entered into an agreement
described in subsection (d)(1) with the United States.
 `(iv) Each alien admitted as a temporary visitor to or while traveling
 through the United States and who is a national or citizen of a foreign
 state which has entered into an agreement described in subsection (d)(2).
 `(B) EXCEPTION- Individuals who are entitled to health insurance benefits
 under a qualified employer health plan under title XXI (relating to
 employer provided health benefits) or who demonstrate coverage under a
 qualified health plan under part C of such title are not eligible for
 health insurance benefits under part A.
 `(2) LONG-TERM CARE, CERTAIN PREVENTIVE BENEFITS, AND LOW-INCOME ASSISTANCE-
 Each of the following individuals is eligible for long-term care benefits
 under subpart 1 of part B, certain preventive benefits under subpart 2 of
 part B, and to low-income assistance under part C (if they meet conditions
 specified in such part):
 `(A) Each citizen or national of the United States.
 `(B) Each alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence or otherwise
 permanently residing in the United States under color of law, including
 aliens lawfully admitted for temporary residence under section 210 or 245A
 of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
 `(b) ENTITLEMENT- Each eligible individual is entitled to benefits under
 this part for services furnished during any period (beginning on or after
 January 1 of the second year beginning after the date of the enactment of
 the USHealth Program Act of 1991) in which the individual is an eligible
 individual, except that payment for such benefits shall not be made until
 the individual (1) is identified as an eligible individual, and (2) a
 suitable identification account number has been established for purposes
 of the administration of this title.
 `(c) ENROLLMENT- The USHealth Board shall provide, in coordination with
 the Secretary of the Treasury and the Administrator of Social Security,
 for the identification of eligible individuals and the issuance of suitable
 identification account numbers for purposes of the administration of this
 title. In conducting such activities, the Board shall seek to assure that--
 `(1) individuals who are eligible individuals at birth are identified as
 such at birth, and
 `(2) other eligible individuals are identified at the time of issuance of
 a Social Security account number.
 `(d) AGREEMENTS WITH FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS AND INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS-
 `(1) RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF FOREIGN GOVERNMENTS OR INTERNATIONAL
 ORGANIZATIONS- The USHealth Board, in consultation with the Secretary
 of State, shall recommend to the President that the President enter into
 an executive agreement with the government of a foreign state or with an
 international organization under which officers and employees (and members
 of the immediate families of such officers and employees) of the government
 or organization who are employed and residing in the United States are made
 eligible for health care benefits under and in accordance with this title
 in return for the payment, with respect to such individual, of the amounts
 that are equivalent to the rate of payment that would be applicable with
 respect to the individual under section 1876.
 `(2) FOREIGN VISITOR AGREEMENTS- The USHealth Board, after consultation
 with the Secretary of State, shall recommend to the President that the
 President enter into an executive agreement with the government of any
 foreign state under which--
 `(A) the nationals or citizens of that state who are foreign visitors
 in the United States would be enrolled in a qualified health plan in the
 United States, and
 `(B) nationals and permanent resident aliens (described in clauses (i) and
 (ii) of subsection (a)(1)(A)) of the United States would receive comparable
 health care benefits while temporarily visiting in or traveling through
 that other state,
but such recommendation shall only be made if the Board determines that such
an agreement is in the national interest.'.
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) SOCIAL SECURITY ACT- (A) Title II of the Social Security Act is amended
 by striking sections 226 and 226A (42 U.S.C. 426, 426-1).
 (B) Title XVIII of such Act is amended by striking sections 1804, 1818,
 1818A, 1831, 1836, 1837, and 1838 (42 U.S.C. 1395b-2, 1395i-2, 1395j,
 1395o, 1395p, 1395q).
 (C) Section 1131(a)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1320b-1(a)(1)) is amended by
 inserting `or' at the end of subparagraph (A) and by striking subparagraph
 (C).
 (D) Section 201(h) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 401(h)) is amended by striking
 `(other than section 226)'.
 (E) Section 210 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 410) is amended by striking subsection
 (p).
 (F) Section 233(c) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 433(c)) is amended by striking
 paragraph (3).
 (G) Section 1881 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395rr) is amended by striking
 subsection (a).
 (2) RAILROAD RETIREMENT ACT- Section 7 of the Railroad Retirement Act of
 1974 (45 U.S.C. 231f) is amended by striking subsection (d).
SEC. 102. TRANSITIONAL MEDICAID COVERAGE OF PREGNANT WOMEN AND INFANTS UP
TO 185 PERCENT OF POVERTY LEVEL.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1902(l)(2)(A)(ii) of the Social Security Act
 (42 U.S.C. 1396a(l)(2)(A)(ii)) is amended--
 (1) in subclause (I), by striking `and' at the end,
 (2) by striking the period at the end of subclause (II) and inserting `,
 and', and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new subclause:
 `(III) January 1 of the first year beginning after the date of the enactment
 of this subclause, 185 percent.'.
 (b) INCREASE TO 100 PERCENT IN FEDERAL MEDICAL ASSISTANCE PERCENTAGE FOR
 ADDITIONAL POPULATIONS COVERED- The first sentence of section 1905(b)
 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396d(b)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `subject to clause (3),' after `except that (1)',
 (2) by striking `and (2)' and inserting `(2)', and
 (3) by inserting before the period at the end the following: `, and (3)
 subject to clause (2), the Federal medical assistance percentage shall
 be 100 percent with respect to expenditures as medical assistance for
 individuals described in subparagraph (A) or (B) of section 1902(l)(1)
 whose income level exceeds 133 percent of the income official poverty
 level referred to in section 1902(l)(2)(A)(i)'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 payments under title XIX of the Social Security Act for calendar quarters
 beginning on or after January 1 of the first year beginning after the
 date of the enactment of this Act, without regard to whether or not final
 regulations to carry out such amendments have been promulgated by such date.
PART 2--BENEFITS
SEC. 111. DESCRIPTION OF BENEFITS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1812 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395d)
 is amended--
 (1) by amending subsection (a) to read as follows:
 `(a) The benefits provided to an individual by the program under this part
 consists of entitlement to have payment made on his behalf for the following:
 `(1) Subject to subsection (b), inpatient hospital services.
 `(2) Subject to subsection (b), medical and other health services.
 `(3) Comprehensive outpatient rehabilitation facility services and home
 intravenous therapy services.
 `(4) Alcohol and drug abuse rehabilitation services (as defined by the
 USHealth Board).
 `(5) Outpatient mental health services (including psychotherapy and
 psychoanalysis) furnished in a community mental health center or by a
 physician, clinical psychologist, clinical social worker, or psychiatric
 nurse specialist (or other qualified provider specified by the USHealth
 Board in regulation) which the provider is legally authorized to perform
 under State law (or the State regulatory mechanism provided by State law)
 and would otherwise be covered if furnished by a physician or as an incident
 to a physician's service.
 `(6) Subject to subsection (c), home health services.'; and
 (2) by striking subsections (b), (c), (d), and (e) and inserting the
 following:
 `(b) Payment under this part--
 `(1) for inpatient hospital services for a mental disorder may not be
 made in any 5-year period after payment for such services has been made
 for 225 days in such period, or
 `(2) for outpatient psychotherapy and counseling visits for a mental disorder
 during a year after payment has been made for 50 such visits during the year.
 `(c) Payment may not be made under this part for home health services
 furnished an individual during any calendar year in excess of 100 visits
 during such year. The number of visits to be charged for purposes of the
 limitation in the preceding sentence shall be determined in accordance
 with regulations.'.
 (b) EXPANSION OF MEDICAL AND OTHER HEALTH SERVICES- Section 1861(s) of
 such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(s)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (2)(L), by inserting before the semicolon the following:
 `, and nurse practitioner and clinical nurse specialist services';
 (2) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (12), and
 (3) by striking paragraphs (13) and (14) and inserting the following:
 `(13) preventive services (as defined in subsection (kk)); and
 `(14) covered outpatient drugs (as defined in subsection (t)).'
 (c) PREVENTIVE SERVICES DEFINED- Section 1861 of the Social Security Act
 (42 U.S.C. 1395x) is amended--
 (1) by inserting after subsection (jj) the following new subsection:
`Preventive Services
 `(kk)(1) The term `preventive services' means the following items and
 services furnished in accordance with any applicable periodicity schedule
 established under paragraph (2):
 `(A) Prenatal care (including home visitation services).
 `(B) Well-child care (including appropriate immunizations according to
 age and health history).
 `(C) Screening mammography (as defined in subsection (jj)).
 `(D) Screening pap smear (as defined in subsection (nn)).
 `(E) Family planning services and supplies furnished (directly or under
 arrangements with others) to individuals of child-bearing age who desire
 such services and supplies.
 `(F) Colorectal cancer screening services (as defined by the USHealth Board).
 `(G) Counseling to modify risk factors for heart disease, cancer, and
 stroke, including dietary measures, weight reduction, smoking restriction,
 and physical conditioning.
Such term also includes such other health services (including adult
immunizations not described in subsection (s)(10)) as the USHealth Board
finds are cost-effective in the prevention of disease or illness.
 `(2)(A) With respect to prenatal care under paragraph (1)(A), the USHealth
 Board shall establish a schedule of periodicity which reflects the
 appropriate frequency with which such care should be provided to pregnant
 women, taking into account age and other risk factors.
 `(B) With respect to well-child care under paragraph (1)(B), the USHealth
 Board shall establish a schedule of periodicity which reflects the general,
 appropriate frequency with which such care should be provided routinely
 to healthy children.
 `(C) With respect to screening mammography and screening pap smear, the
 USHealth Board shall establish a schedule of periodicity which reflects
 the appropriate frequency with which such services should be provided to
 individuals, taking into account age and other risk factors.
 `(D) With respect to colorectal cancer screening services described
 in paragraph (1)(F), the USHealth Board shall establish a schedule of
 periodicity which reflects the appropriate frequency with which such
 services should be provided to individuals, taking into account age and
 other risk factors.
 `(E) With respect to risk modification counseling described in paragraph
 (1)(G), the USHealth Board shall establish a schedule of periodicity
 which reflects the appropriate frequency with which such services should
 be provided to individuals, taking into account age and other risk factors.
 `(3) The USHealth Board shall consult with recognized medical organizations
 involved in the respective field (or fields) of health in establishing
 the periodicity schedules under paragraph (2).
 `(4) The USHealth Board shall establish standards for entities furnishing
 preventive services under this title, in the case of providers and
 practitioners who otherwise are not qualified to provide other services
 under this title.'; and
 (2) in subsection (nn), by striking `, if the individual' and all that
 follows through `by the Secretary))'.
 (d) COVERED OUTPATIENT DRUGS DEFINED- Section 1861(t) of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395x(t)) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `and paragraph (2)' after `subsection (m)(5)',
 (2) by striking `(t)' and inserting `(t)(1)', and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs:
 `(2) Subject to paragraph (3), the term `covered outpatient drug' means--
 `(A) a drug which may be dispensed only upon prescription and--
 `(i) which is approved for safety and effectiveness as a prescription drug
 under section 505 or 507 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act or
 which is approved under section 505(j) of such Act;
 `(ii)(I) which was commercially used or sold in the United States before the
 date of the enactment of the Drug Amendments of 1962 or which is identical,
 similar, or related (within the meaning of section 310.6(b)(1) of title
 21 of the Code of Federal Regulations) to such a drug, and (II) which has
 not been the subject of a final determination by the Secretary that it is a
 `new drug' (within the meaning of section 201(p) of the Federal Food, Drug,
 and Cosmetic Act) or an action brought by the Secretary under section 301,
 302(a), or 304(a) of such Act to enforce section 502(f) or 505(a) of such
 Act; or
 `(iii)(I) which is described in section 107(c)(3) of the Drug Amendments
 of 1962 and for which the Secretary has determined there is a compelling
 justification for its medical need, or is identical, similar, or related
 (within the meaning of section 310.6(b)(1) of title 21 of the Code of
 Federal Regulations) to such a drug, and (II) for which the Secretary has
 not issued a notice of an opportunity for a hearing under section 505(e)
 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act on a proposed order of the
 Secretary to withdraw approval of an application for such drug under such
 section because the Secretary has determined that the drug is less than
 effective for all conditions of use prescribed, recommended, or suggested
 in its labeling;
 `(B) a biological product which--
 `(i) may only be dispensed upon prescription,
 `(ii) is licensed under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act, and
 `(iii) is produced at an establishment licensed under such section to
 produce such product; and
 `(C) insulin certified under section 506 of the Federal Food, Drug, and
 Cosmetic Act.
 `(3)(A) The term `covered outpatient drug' does not include any drug,
 biological product, or insulin provided as, as part of, or as incident
 to, any of the following (and for which payment may be included under
 this title):
 `(i) Inpatient hospital services (described in subsection (b)(2)).
 `(ii) Nursing facility services (described in section 1832(a)(3)).
 `(iii) Physicians' services under subparagraph (A) or (B) of subsection
 (s)(2).
 `(iv) Dialysis supplies under subsection (s)(2)(F).
 `(v) Antigens under subsection (s)(2)(G).
 `(vi) Blood clotting factors for hemophiliacs under subsection (s)(2)(I).
 `(vii) Services of a physician assistant, nurse practitioner, or clinical
 nurse specialist under subsection (s)(2)(K).
 `(viii) Pneumococcal, hepatitis B, or influenza vaccines under subsection
 (s)(10).
 `(ix) Rural health clinic services (under subsection (aa)(1)).
 `(x) Comprehensive outpatient rehabilitation facility services (under
 subsection (cc)(1)).
 `(xi) Hospice care (as defined in subsection (dd)(1)).
 `(xii) Certified nurse-midwife service (as defined in subsection (gg)(1)).
 `(xiii) Inpatient or outpatient rural primary care hospital services
 (as defined in subsection (mm)).
 `(xiv) A covered surgical procedure in an ambulatory surgical center
 (under section 1832(a)(2)(F)(i)).
 `(xv) Preventive services.
 `(B) The term `covered outpatient drug' does not include a drug that is
 intravenously administered in a home setting unless it is a covered home
 IV drug.
 `(C)(i) The term `covered home IV drug' means a covered outpatient drug
 dispensed to an individual that--
 `(I) is intravenously administered in a place of residence used as the
 individual's home, and
 `(II) is an antibiotic drug and the USHealth Board has not determined, for
 the specific drug or for the indication to which it is applied, that the drug
 cannot generally be administered safely and effectively in a home setting,
 or is not an antibiotic drug and the Board has determined, for the specific
 drug and the indication for which the drug is being applied, that the drug
 can generally be administered safely and effectively in a home setting.
 `(ii) The USHealth Board shall periodically publish a list of the drugs,
 and indications for such drugs, that are covered home IV drugs (as defined
 in clause (i)), with respect to which home intravenous drug therapy may
 be provided under this title.'.
 (e) HOME INTRAVENOUS DRUG THERAPY SERVICES DEFINED- Section 1861 of such
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x) is further amended by adding at the end the following
 new subsection:
`Home Intravenous Drug Therapy Services
 `(oo)(1) The term `home intravenous drug therapy services' means the items
 and services described in paragraph (2) furnished to an individual who is
 under the care of a physician--
 `(A) in a place of residence used as such individual's home;
 `(B) by a qualified home intravenous drug therapy provider (as defined
 in paragraph (3)) or by others under arrangements with them made by such
 provider; and
 `(C) under a plan established and periodically reviewed by a physician.
 `(2) The items and services described in this paragraph are such nursing,
 pharmacy, and related services (including medical supplies, intravenous
 fluids, delivery, and equipment) as are necessary to conduct safely and
 effectively an intravenously administered drug regimen through use of a
 covered home IV drug (as defined in subsection (t)(4)), but do not include
 such covered outpatient drugs.
 `(3) The term `qualified home intravenous drug therapy provider' means any
 entity that the USHealth Board determines meets the following requirements:
 `(A) The entity is capable of providing or arranging for all the items and
 services described in paragraph (2) (including home health aide services)
 and covered home IV drugs.
 `(B) The entity maintains clinical records on all patients.
 `(C) The entity adheres to written protocols and policies with respect to
 the provision of items and services.
 `(D) The entity makes services available (as needed) seven days a week on
 a 24-hour basis.
 `(E) The entity coordinates all services with the patient's physician.
 `(F) The entity conducts a quality assessment and assurance program,
 including drug regimen review and coordination of patient care.
 `(G) The entity assures that only trained personnel provide covered home
 IV drugs (and any other service for which training is required to safely
 provide the service).
 `(H) The entity assumes responsibility for the quality of services provided
 by others under arrangements with the agency or entity.
 `(I) In the case of an entity in any State in which State or applicable
 local law provides for the licensing of entities of this nature, (i)
 is licensed pursuant to such law, or (ii) is approved, by the agency of
 such State or locality responsible for licensing entities of this nature,
 as meeting the standards established for such licensing.
 `(J) The entity meets such other requirements as the Board may determine
 in regulations are necessary to assure the safe and effective provision
 of home intravenous drug therapy services and the efficient administration
 of the home intravenous drug therapy benefit.
Nothing in subparagraph (J) shall be construed as requiring such an entity to
have a full-time pharmacist in order to be a qualified home intravenous drug
therapy provider. An entity is deemed to have met a requirement specified
in this paragraph if the USHealth Board determines that the entity has met
an identical requirement in order for the entity to be certified as a home
health agency.'.
SEC. 112. CHANGES IN EXCLUSIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1862(a) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395y(a)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1)--
 (A) by striking `and' at the end of subparagraph (F),
 (B) by striking the semicolon at the end of subparagraph (G) and inserting
 `, and', and
 (C) by adding after subparagraph (G) the following new subparagraphs:
 `(H) in the case of preventive services and services under subpart 2 of part
 B, which are provided consistent with the periodicity schedule established
 under section 1861(kk)(2) or with any periodicity schedule applicable to
 such services, respectively;'.
 (2) in paragraph (7), by inserting `except as permitted with respect to
 preventive services under paragraph (1)(H),' after `(7)'; and
 (3) in paragraph (12), by inserting `except as permitted with respect to
 preventive services under paragraph (1)(H),' after `(12)'.
 (b) COORDINATION WITH EMPLOYER PLANS- Section 1862(b) of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395y(b)) is repealed, effective with respect to employers as of
 the date the employers are subject to the requirements of title XXI of
 the Social Security Act.
 (c) STANDARDS FOR CERTIFICATION OF CERTAIN SERVICES-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 1814(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395f(a)) is amended--
 (A) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (6),
 (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (7) and inserting a
 semicolon, and
 (C) by inserting after paragraph (7) the following new paragraphs:
 `(8) in the case of comprehensive outpatient rehabilitation facility
 services, (A) such services are or were required because the individual
 needed skilled rehabilitation services, (B) a plan for furnishing such
 services has been established and is periodically reviewed by a physician,
 and (C) such services are or were furnished while the individual is or
 was under the care of a physician;
 `(9) in the case of outpatient physical therapy services, (A) such services
 are or were required because the individual needed physical therapy services,
 (B) a plan for furnishing such services has been established by a physician
 or by the qualified physical therapist providing such services and is
 periodically reviewed by a physician, and (C) such services are or were
 furnished while the individual is or was under the care of a physician;
 `(10) in the case of outpatient speech pathology services, (A) such services
 are or were required because the individual needed speech pathology services,
 (B) a plan for furnishing such services has been established by a physician
 or by the qualified speech pathologist providing such services and is
 periodically reviewed by a physician, and (C) such services are or were
 furnished while the individual is or was under the care of a physician;
 `(11) in the case of home intravenous drug therapy services, (A) such services
 are or were required because the individual needed such services for the
 administration of a covered home IV drug, (B) a plan for furnishing such
 services has been established and is reviewed periodically by a physician,
 (C) such services are or were furnished while the individual is or was under
 the care of a physician, (D) such services are administered in a place of
 residence used as such individual's home, and (E) with respect to such
 services initiated before January 1 of the 5th year beginning after the
 date of the enactment of this paragraph, such services have been reviewed
 and approved by a utilization and peer review organization under section
 1154(a)(17) before the date such services were initiated (or, in the case of
 services first initiated on an outpatient basis, within 1 working day (except
 in exceptional circumstances) of the date of initiation of the services); and
 `(12) in the case of medical and other health services (except services
 described in subparagraph (B), (C), (D), (E), or (F) of section 1861(s)(2)),
 such services are or were medically required.
With respect to items described in section 1861(s)(14), the certification
requirements of paragraph (11) shall be satisfied by the physician's
prescription.'.
 (2) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- (A) Section 1835 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395n)
 is repealed.
 (B) Section 1861(u) of such Act (42 U.S.C 1395x(u)) is amended by striking
 `and section 1835(e)'.
 (C) Section 1880(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395qq(a)) is amended by striking
 `sections 1814(c) and 1835(d)' and inserting `section 1814(c)'.
 (d) LIMITATION ON LENGTH OF PRESCRIPTION- Section 1862(c) of such Act
 (42 U.S.C. 1395y(c)) is amended--
 (1) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) through (D) of paragraph (1) as
 clauses (i) through (iv);
 (2) in paragraph (2)(A), by striking `paragraph (1)' and inserting
 `subparagraph (A)';
 (3) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (2) as clauses
 (i) and (ii);
 (4) by redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2) as subparagraphs (A) and (B);
 (5) by inserting `(1)' after `(c)'; and
 (6) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(2) No payment may be made under part A for any expense incurred for a
 covered outpatient drug if the drug is dispensed in a quantity exceeding
 a supply of 30 days or such longer period of time (not to exceed 90 days,
 except in exceptional circumstances) as the USHealth Board may authorize.'.
SEC. 113. ELIMINATION OF ALL MANDATORY BENEFITS UNDER MEDICAID PROGRAM.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) LIMITING FEDERAL FINANCIAL PARTICIPATION FOR SERVICES COVERED
 UNDER USHEALTH PROGRAM- Section 1903(i) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1396b(i)) is amended--
 (A) in the paragraph (10) inserted by section 4401(a)(1)(B) of Omnibus
 Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990, by striking all that follows `1927(g)'
 and inserting a semicolon;
 (B) by redesignating the paragraph (10) added by section 4701(b)(2)
 as paragraph (11), by transferring and inserting it after the paragraph
 (10) inserted by section 4401(a)(1)(B) of Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
 Act of 1990, and by striking all that follows `with respect to hospitals
 or facilities' and inserting a semicolon;
 (C) by transferring and inserting the paragraph (12) inserted by section
 4752(a)(2) of Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 after paragraph
 (11), as redesignated by subparagraph (B), and by striking the period at
 the end and inserting a semicolon;
 (D) by redesignating the paragraph (14) inserted by section 4752(e) of
 Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 as paragraph (13), by transferring
 and inserting it after paragraph (12), and by striking the period at the
 end and inserting a semicolon;
 (E) by redesignating the paragraph (11) inserted by section 4801(e)(16)(A) of
 Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 as paragraph (14), by transferring
 and inserting it after paragraph (13), and by striking the period at the
 end and inserting `; or'; and
 (F) by inserting after paragraph (14), as so redesignated, the following
 new paragraph:
 `(15) with respect to items and services for which payment is made under
 the USHealth program under title XVIII.'.
 (2) CLARIFICATION OF NONDUPLICATION OF MEDICAL ASSISTANCE WITH BENEFITS
 UNDER USHEALTH PROGRAM- Title XIX of such Act is amended by adding at the
 end the following new section:
`NONDUPLICATION OF BENEFITS WITH USHEALTH PROGRAM
 `SEC. 1931. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, a State
 is not required under its plan under section 1901(a) to provide medical
 assistance for items and services (including low-income assistance) for
 which payment is made under title XVIII.'.
 (3) CLARIFICATION OF APPLICATION OF THIRD-PARTY PAYOR RULES TO QUALIFIED
 HEALTH PLANS- Section 1902(a)(25)(A) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1396a(a)(25)(A))
 is amended by inserting `and qualified employer health plans certified
 under part C of title XXI' after `health insurers'.
 (b) CONTINUATION OF OPTIONAL BENEFITS NOT COVERED UNDER USHEALTH PROGRAM-
 Nothing in this Act shall be construed as--
 (1) changing the eligibility of individuals for medical assistance under
 title XIX of the Social Security Act, or
 (2) subject to the amendments made by subsection (a), changing the amount,
 duration, or scope of medical assistance required (or permitted) to be
 provided under such title.
PART 3--PAYMENTS FOR SERVICES
SEC. 121. NO COINSURANCE FOR INPATIENT HOSPITAL SERVICES; APPLICATION OF
UNIFIED ANNUAL DEDUCTIBLE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1813 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395e)
 is amended--
 (1) by amending paragraph (1) of subsection (a) to read as follows:
 `(1)(A) The amount payable for inpatient hospital services furnished to
 an individual during the individual's first period of hospitalization to
 begin during a calendar year shall be reduced by a deduction equal to the
 deductible amount specified in section 1813A(b), reduced by any expenses
 incurred in the year which are counted towards such deductible for the year.
 `(B) For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `period of hospitalization'
 means, with respect to an individual, the period beginning on the first day
 the individual is furnished inpatient hospital services and ending on the
 individual's date of discharge (as established by the USHealth Board for
 purposes of section 1886) from the hospital (or, in the case of a transfer,
 hospitals) involved.';
 (2) by striking paragraphs (3) and (4) of subsection (a); and
 (3) by striking subsection (b).
 (b) CONFORMING LIMITATION ON CHARGES- Section 1866(a)(2)(A) of such Act
 (42 U.S.C. 1395cc(a)(2)(A)) is amended by striking `or coinsurance amount
 imposed pursuant to section 1813(a)(1), (a)(3), or (a)(4),' and inserting
 `imposed pursuant to section 1813(a)'.
SEC. 122. PAYMENTS FOR MEDICAL AND OTHER HEALTH SERVICES GENERALLY.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1833 of the Social Security Act is amended by
 redesignating it as section 1814A and by transferring and inserting it
 after section 1814 and by amending it as follows:
 (1) In the heading, by adding `FOR OTHER THAN INPATIENT HOSPITAL SERVICES
 AND COVERED OUTPATIENT DRUGS' at the end,
 (2) in subsection (a)--
 (A) by striking `Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund'
 and inserting `USHealth Program Trust Fund';
 (B) by striking `1834' each place it appears and inserting `1814B';
 (C) in paragraph (1), by striking `services described in section 1832(a)(1)'
 and inserting `medical and other health services (except covered
 outpatient drugs and except as provided in the succeeding provisions of
 this subsection)';
 (D) in paragraph (2), by inserting `, as such sections were in effect before
 the date of the enactment of the USHealth Program Act of 1991' after `1881)';
 (E) in paragraph (3), by inserting `, as such section was in effect
 before the date of the enactment of the USHealth Program Act of 1991'
 after `1832(a)(2)';
 (F) in paragraph (4), by inserting `, as such section was in effect
 before the date of the enactment of the USHealth Program Act of 1991'
 after `1832(a)(2)(F)';
 (G) in paragraph (5), by striking `1834(a)(13)' and `1834(a)(1)' and
 inserting `1814B(a)(13)' and `1814B(a)(1)', respectively; and
 (H) in paragraph (6), by striking `1834(h)(4)' and `1834(h)' and inserting
 `1814B(h)(4)' and `1814B(h)', respectively;
 (2) in subsection (b)--
 (A) in the first sentence, by inserting `or section 1813B' after `subsection
 (a)',
 (B) by striking `$75 for calendar years before 1991 and $100 for 1991
 and subsequent years' and inserting `the deductible amount specified in
 subsection (d)(3)',
 (C) by inserting before the period at the end of the first sentence the
 following: `or preventive services', and
 (D) by adding at the end the following: `There shall be credited against
 the deductible under this subsection amounts incurred that are credited
 against the deductible under section 1813(a).';
 (3) by amending subsection (d) to read as follows:
 `(d)(1) Payments under this section are subject to adjustment of coinsurance
 under section 1814C.
 `(2) Payment under this part for durable medical equipment shall not be
 made in cases where payment for such equipment may be made under subpart
 1 of part B.
 `(3) The amount of the deductible specified under this paragraph is $250
 for any individual, except that the amount of such deductible with respect
 to all members of a family (as defined in section 2181(d)(1)) shall not
 exceed $500.'.
 (b) REDESIGNATION OF OTHER SECTIONS- Sections 1834 and 1848 of such Act are
 redesignated as sections 1814B and 1816A, respectively, and by transferring
 and inserting them after section 1814A (as redesignated by subsection (a))
 and after section 1816, as redesignated by section 411(b)(2) of this Act,
 respectively. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Act, any
 reference in law (in effect before the date of the enactment of this Act)
 to section 1834 or section 1848 of the Social Security Act (or a subdivision
 thereof) is deemed a reference to section 1814B or 1816A (or a subdivision
 thereof), respectively, of such Act.
SEC. 123. PAYMENT FOR COVERED OUTPATIENT DRUGS AND HOME INTRAVENOUS DRUG
THERAPY.
 (a) PAYMENT AMOUNTS FOR COVERED OUTPATIENT DRUGS- (1) Section 1814A(a)(1)
 of the Social Security Act, as redesignated by section 122(a), is amended--
 (A) by striking `, (M)' and inserting `, (N)';
 (B) by striking `and (N)' and inserting `, (O)'; and
 (C) by inserting after `1848(a)(1)' the following: `, and (P) with respect
 to expenses incurred for covered outpatient drugs, the amounts paid shall
 be the amounts determined under section 1814B(d)(2)'.
 (2) Section 1814A(a)(2) of such Act is amended by inserting `(other than
 covered outpatient drugs)' after `(2) in the case of services'.
 (3) Section 1814B of such Act, as redesignated by section 122(b) of this Act,
 is amended by inserting after subsection (c) the following new subsection:
 `(d) PAYMENT FOR COVERED OUTPATIENT DRUGS-
 `(1) PAYMENT AMOUNT-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Subject to the deductible established under section 1813A(b)
 and except as provided in subparagraph (B), the amounts payable under this
 part with respect to a covered outpatient drug is equal to 80 percent of
 the lesser of--
 `(i) the actual charge for the drug, or
 `(ii) the applicable payment limit established under paragraph (2).
 `(B) TREATMENT OF CERTAIN COST-BASED PREPAID ORGANIZATIONS- In applying
 subparagraph (A) in the case of an organization under a reasonable cost
 reimbursement contract under section 1876 and in the case of an organization
 receiving payment under section 1814A(a)(1)(A) and providing coverage of
 covered outpatient drugs, the USHealth Board shall provide for an appropriate
 adjustment in the payment amounts otherwise made to reflect the aggregate
 increase in payments that would otherwise be made with respect to enrollees
 in such an organization if payments were made other than under such clause
 or such a contract on an individual-by-individual basis.
 `(2) PAYMENT LIMITS-
 `(A) PAYMENT LIMIT FOR NON-MULTIPLE SOURCE DRUGS AND MULTIPLE-SOURCE DRUGS
 WITH RESTRICTIVE PRESCRIPTIONS- In the case of a drug that either is not
 a multiple source drug (as defined in paragraph (7)(A)) or is a multiple
 source drug and has a restrictive prescription (as defined in paragraph
 (7)(B)), the payment limit for the drug under this paragraph for a payment
 calculation period is equal to the lesser of--
 `(i) the 90th percentile of the actual charges (computed on a statewide
 basis, carrier-wide basis, or other appropriate geographic area basis, as
 specified by the USHealth Board) for the drug for the second previous payment
 calculation period, adjusted (as the Board determines to be appropriate)
 to reflect the number of tablets (or other dosage units) dispensed; or
 `(ii) the amount of the administrative allowance (established under paragraph
 (3)) plus the product of--
 `(I) the number of tablets (or other dosage units) dispensed, and
 `(II) the per tablet or unit average wholesale price for such drug (as
 determined under subparagraph (C) for the period for purposes of this
 subparagraph).
 `(B) PAYMENT LIMIT FOR MULTIPLE SOURCE DRUGS WITHOUT RESTRICTIVE
 PRESCRIPTIONS- In the case of a drug that is a multiple source drug but
 does not have a restrictive prescription, the payment limit for the drug
 under this paragraph for a payment calculation period is equal to the
 amount of the administrative allowance (established under paragraph (3))
 plus the product of--
 `(i) the number of tablets (or other dosage units) dispensed, and
 `(ii) the unweighted median of the per tablet or unit average wholesale
 prices (determined under subparagraph (C) for purposes of this subparagraph)
 for such drug for the period.
 `(C) DETERMINATION OF UNIT PRICE-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this paragraph, the USHealth Board shall
 determine, with respect to the dispensing of a covered outpatient drug in
 a payment calculation period (beginning on or after January 1 of the first
 year in which this section is effective), the per tablet or unit average
 wholesale price for the drug.
 `(ii) BASIS FOR DETERMINATIONS-
 `(I) DETERMINATION FOR NON-MULTIPLE-SOURCE DRUGS- For purposes of
 subparagraph (A), such determination shall be based on a biannual survey
 conducted by the USHealth Board of a representative sample of direct sellers,
 wholesalers, or pharmacies (as appropriate) of wholesale (or comparable
 direct) prices (excluding discounts to pharmacies); except that if, because
 of low volume of sales for the drug or other appropriate reasons or in the
 case of covered outpatient drugs during the first year in which this section
 is effective, the Board determines that such a survey is not appropriate
 with respect to a specific drug, such determination shall be based on
 published average wholesale (or comparable direct) prices for the drug.
 `(II) DETERMINATION FOR MULTIPLE-SOURCE DRUGS- For purposes of subparagraph
 (B), the Board may base the determination under this subparagraph on the
 published average wholesale (or comparable direct) prices for the drug or
 on a biannual survey conducted by the Board of a representative sample of
 direct sellers, wholesalers, or pharmacists (as appropriate) of wholesale
 (or comparable direct) prices (excluding discounts to pharmacies).
 `(III) COMPLIANCE WITH SURVEY REQUIRED- If a wholesaler or direct seller
 of a covered outpatient drug refuses, after being requested by the Board,
 to provide the information required in a survey under this clause, or
 deliberately provides information that is false, the Board may impose
 a civil money penalty of not to exceed $10,000 for each such refusal or
 provision of false information. The provisions of section 1128A (other
 than subsections (a) and (b)) shall apply to civil money penalties under
 the previous sentence in the same manner as such provisions apply to a
 penalty or proceeding under section 1128A(a). Information gathered pursuant
 to the survey shall not be disclosed except as the Board determines to be
 necessary to carry out the purposes of this part.
 `(iii) QUANTITY AND TIMING- Such determination shall be based on the price
 or prices for purchases in reasonable quantities and shall be made for a
 payment calculation period based on prices for the first day of the first
 month of the previous payment calculation period.
 `(iv) GEOGRAPHIC BASIS- The Board shall make such determination, and
 calculate the payment limits under this paragraph, on a national basis;
 except that the Board may make such determination, and calculate such
 payment limits, on a regional basis to take account of limitations on the
 availability of drug products and variations among regions in the average
 wholesale prices for a drug product.
 `(3) ADMINISTRATIVE ALLOWANCE FOR PURPOSES OF PAYMENT LIMITS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subparagraph (B), for drugs
 dispensed in--
 `(i) the first year beginning 2 years after the date of the enactment of
 this subsection, the administrative allowance under this paragraph is--
 `(I) $5.50 for drugs dispensed by a participating pharmacy, or
 `(II) $3.00 for drugs dispensed by another pharmacy; or
 `(ii) a subsequent year, the administrative allowance under this paragraph
 is the administrative allowance under this paragraph for the preceding
 year increased by the percentage increase (if any) in the implicit price
 deflator for gross national product (as published by the Department of
 Commerce in its `Survey of Current Business') over the 12-month period
 ending with August of such preceding year.
Any allowance determined under the clause (ii) which is not a multiple of
1 cent shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of 1 cent.
 `(B) ADJUSTMENT IN ALLOWANCE FOR MAIL SERVICE PHARMACIES- The USHealth Board
 may, by regulation and after consultation with pharmacists, elderly groups,
 and private insurers, reduce the administrative allowances established
 under subparagraph (A) for any drug dispensed by a mail service pharmacy
 (as defined by the Board) based on differences between such pharmacies
 and other pharmacies with respect to operating costs and other economies.
 `(4) ASSURING APPROPRIATE PRESCRIBING AND DISPENSING PRACTICES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The USHealth Board shall establish a program to identify
 (and to educate physicians and pharmacists concerning)--
 `(i) instances or patterns of unnecessary or inappropriate prescribing or
 dispensing practices for covered outpatient drugs;
 `(ii) instances or patterns of substandard care with respect to such
 drugs; and
 `(iii) potential adverse reactions.
 `(B) STANDARDS- In carrying out the program under subparagraph (A), the
 Board shall establish for each covered outpatient drug standards for the
 prescribing of the drug which are based on accepted medical practice. In
 establishing such standards, the Board shall incorporate standards from
 such current authoritative compendia as the Board may select; except
 that the Board may modify such a standard by regulation on the basis of
 scientific and medical information that such standard is not consistent
 with the safe and effective use of the drug.
 `(C) PROHIBITION OF FORMULARY- Nothing in this title (other than section
 1862(c)) shall be construed as authorizing the USHealth Board to exclude
 from coverage or to deny payment--
 `(i) for any specific covered outpatient drug, or specific class of covered
 outpatient drug; or
 `(ii) for any specific use of such a drug for a specific indication unless
 such exclusion is pursuant to section 1862(a)(1) based on a finding by
 the Board that such use is not safe or is not effective.
 `(5) TREATMENT OF CERTAIN PLAN CHARGES- In the case of covered outpatient
 drugs furnished by an eligible organization under section 1876(b) or an
 organization described in section 1814A(a)(1)(A) which does not impose
 charges on covered outpatient drugs dispensed to its members, for purposes
 of this subsection the actual charges of the organization shall be the
 organization's standard charges to members, and other individuals, not
 entitled to benefits with respect to such drugs.
 `(6) PHYSICIAN GUIDE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The USHealth Board shall develop, and update annually,
 an information guide for physicians concerning the comparative average
 wholesale prices of at least 500 of the most commonly prescribed covered
 outpatient drugs. Such guide shall, to the extent practicable, group covered
 outpatient drugs (including multiple source drugs) in a manner useful to
 physicians by therapeutic category or with respect to the conditions for
 which they are prescribed. Such guide shall specify the average wholesale
 prices on the basis of the amount of the drug required for a typical daily
 therapeutic regimen.
 `(B) MAILING GUIDE- The USHealth Board shall provide for mailing, in
 January of each year (beginning with the first year in which this section
 is effective), a copy of the guide developed and updated under subparagraph
 (A)--
 `(i) to each hospital with an agreement in effect under section 1866;
 `(ii) to each physician (as defined in section 1861(r)(1)) who routinely
 provides services under this part; and
 `(iii) to Social Security offices, senior citizen centers, and other
 appropriate places.
 `(7) DEFINITIONS- In this subsection:
 `(A) MULTIPLE SOURCE DRUG-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- The term `multiple source drug' means, with respect to
 a payment calculation period, a covered outpatient drug for which there
 are 2 or more drug products which--
 `(I) are rated as therapeutically equivalent (under the Food and Drug
 Administration's most recent publication of `Approved Drug Products with
 Therapeutic Equivalence Evaluations');
 `(II) except as provided in clause (ii), are pharmaceutically equivalent
 and bioequivalent, as defined in clause (iii) and as determined by the
 Food and Drug Administration; and
 `(III) are sold or marketed during the period.
 `(ii) EXCEPTION- Subclause (II) of clause (i) shall not apply if the Food
 and Drug Administration changes by regulation (after an opportunity for
 public comment of 90 days) the requirement that, for purposes of the
 publication described in clause (i)(I), in order for drug products to
 be rated as therapeutically equivalent, they must be pharmaceutically
 equivalent and bioequivalent, as defined in clause (iii).
 `(iii) DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this subparagraph:
 `(I) PHARMACEUTICALLY EQUIVALENT- Drug products are pharmaceutically
 equivalent if the products contain identical amounts of the same active
 drug ingredient in the same dosage form and meet compendial or other
 applicable standards of strength, quality, purity, and identity.
 `(II) BIOEQUIVALENT- Drugs are bioequivalent if they do not present a known
 or potential bioequivalence problem or, if they do present such a problem,
 are shown to meet an appropriate standard of bioequivalence.
 `(III) SOLD OR MARKETED- A drug is considered to be sold or marketed during
 a period if it is listed in the publications referred to in clause (i)(I),
 unless the USHealth Board determines that such sale or marketing is not
 actually taking place.
 `(B) RESTRICTIVE PRESCRIPTION- A drug has a `restrictive prescription'
 only if--
 `(i) in the case of a written prescription, the prescription for the drug
 indicates, in the handwriting of the physician or other person prescribing
 the drug and with an appropriate phrase (such as `brand medically
 necessary') recognized by the USHealth Board, that the particular drug
 must be dispensed; or
 `(ii) in the case of a prescription issued by telephone--
 `(I) the physician or other person prescribing the drug (through use of such
 an appropriate phrase) states that the particular drug must be dispensed, and
 `(II) the physician or other person submits to the pharmacy involved,
 within 30 days after the date of the telephone prescription, a written
 confirmation which is in the handwriting of the physician or other person
 prescribing the drug and which indicates with such appropriate phrase that
 the particular drug was required to have been dispensed.
 `(C) PAYMENT CALCULATION PERIOD- The term `payment calculation period'
 means the 6-month period beginning with January of each year and the
 6-month period beginning with July of each year.'.
 (b) Payment for Home Intravenous Drug Therapy-
 (1) TREATMENT- Section 1814A of such Act, as redesignated by section 122(a),
 is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a)(2)(B), by striking `or (E)' and inserting `(E), or
 (F)';
 (B) in subsection (a)(2)(D), by striking `and' at the end;
 (C) in subsection (a)(2)(E), by striking the semicolon and inserting `; and';
 (D) by inserting after subsection (a)(2)(E) the following new subparagraph:
 `(F) with respect to home intravenous drug therapy services, the amounts
 described in section 1814B(e)(1);'; and
 (E) in subsection (b), by striking `services, (3)' and inserting `services
 and home intravenous drug therapy services, (3)'.
 (2) GENERAL RULE- Section 1814B of such Act, as redesignated by section
 122(b) and as amended by section 123(a)(3), is amended by adding at the
 end the following new subsection:
 `(e) HOME INTRAVENOUS DRUG THERAPY SERVICES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- With respect to home intravenous drug therapy services,
 subject to paragraph (3), payment under this part shall be made in an
 amount equal to the lesser of the actual charges for such services or the
 fee schedule established under paragraph (2).
 `(2) ESTABLISHMENT OF FEE SCHEDULE- The USHealth Board shall establish by
 regulation before the beginning of the first year in which this subsection
 is effective and each succeeding calendar year a fee schedule for home
 intravenous drug therapy services for which payment is made under this
 part. A fee schedule established under this subsection shall be on a per
 diem basis. Such fee schedule shall provide for amounts that are adequate
 to ensure patient access to home intraveneous drug therapy services and that
 take into account the length of home visits required for the administration
 of home intravenous drug therapy and the need to train patients in the
 complex procedures associated with such therapy.
 `(3) LIMITATION ON ACCEPTANCE OF, AND PAYMENTS FOR, CERTAIN REFERRALS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subparagraph (B), a home intravenous
 drug therapy provider may not provide home intravenous drug therapy services
 under this part to an individual if the individual's referring physician
 (as defined in subparagraph (D)), or an immediate family member of the
 physician--
 `(i) has an ownership interest in the provider, or
 `(ii) receives compensation from the provider.
 `(B) EXCEPTIONS-
 `(i) PUBLICLY TRADED STOCK AND RURAL PROVIDERS- Subparagraph (A)(i) shall
 not apply--
 `(I) if the ownership interest is the ownership of stock which is traded
 over a publicly-regulated exchange and was purchased on terms generally
 available to the public, or
 `(II) if the provider is a sole home intravenous drug therapy provider
 (as defined by the USHealth Board) in a rural area.
 `(ii) CERTAIN COMPENSATION- Subparagraph (A)(ii) shall not apply if the
 compensation is reasonably related to items or services actually provided
 by the physician and does not vary in proportion to the number of referrals
 made by the referring physician, but such exception shall not apply to
 compensation provided for direct patient care services.
 `(iii) UNCOMPENSATED OFFICERS- Subparagraph (A) shall not be construed to
 apply to a referring physician whose only ownership or financial relationship
 with the provider is as an uncompensated officer or director of the provider.
 `(iv) OTHER EXCEPTIONS- Subparagraph (A) also shall not apply in such cases,
 established by the USHealth Board in regulations, in which the nature of the
 ownership or compensation does not pose a substantial risk of program abuse.
 `(C) SANCTIONS-
 `(i) DENIAL OF PAYMENT- No payment may be made under this part for home
 intravenous drug therapy services which are provided in violation of
 subparagraph (A).
 `(ii) CIVIL MONEY PENALTY FOR IMPROPER CLAIMS- Any person (including a home
 intravenous drug therapy provider or physician) that presents or causes
 to be presented a claim for an item or service that such person knows or
 should know is for an item or service for which payment may not be made
 under subparagraph (A) shall be subject to a civil money penalty of not more
 than $15,000 for each such item or service. The provisions of section 1128A
 (other than the first sentence of subsection (a) and other than subsection
 (b)) shall apply to a civil money penalty under the previous sentence in
 the same manner as such provisions apply to a penalty or proceeding under
 section 1128A(a).
 `(D) REFERRING PHYSICIAN DEFINED- In this paragraph, the term `referring
 physician' means, with respect to providing home intravenous drug therapy
 services to an individual, a physician who--
 `(i) prescribed the covered home IV drug for which the services are to be
 provided, or
 `(ii) established the plan of care for such services.'.
 (3) PROPAC STUDY- The Prospective Payment Assessment Commission shall
 conduct a study, and make recommendations to Congress and the Secretary
 of Health and Human Services by not later than March 1, of the first year
 beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act, concerning appropriate
 adjustment to the payment amounts provided under section 1886(d) of the
 Social Security Act for inpatient hospital services to account for reduced
 costs to hospitals resulting from the amendments made by this section.
SEC. 124. PROTECTION AGAINST CATASTROPHIC OUT-OF-POCKET EXPENSES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Part A of title XVIII of the Social Security Act is further
 amended by inserting after section 1814B the following new section:
`PROTECTION AGAINST CATASTROPHIC OUT-OF-POCKET EXPENSES
 `SEC. 1814C. (a) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding the previous provisions of this
 part, if an individual (or members of a family) has incurred out-of-pocket
 covered cost-sharing (as defined in subsection (b)) in a calendar year in
 an amount equal to the applicable catastrophic limit (established under
 subsection (c)) for the year, payment under this part with respect to any
 additional incurred expenses in the year shall be made as if--
 `(1) the deductibles under sections 1813(a)(1) and 1814A(b), and the
 blood deductible described in section 1813(a)(2) and the second sentence
 of section 1814A(b) no longer applied, and
 `(2) `100 percent' and `0 percent' were substituted for `80 percent' and
 `20 percent', respectively, each place either appears in subsections (a)
 and (i)(2) of section 1814A, in sections 1814B(a)(1)(A), 1814B(d)(1)(A),
 1814B(e)(1)(C), and 1866(a)(2)(A), and in subsections (b)(2) and (b)(3)
 of section 1881.
 `(b) OUT-OF-POCKET COVERED COST-SHARING DEFINED- In this section, the term
 `out-of-pocket covered cost-sharing' means, with respect to an individual
 covered under this part, the amounts of expenses that the individual incurs
 that are attributable to--
 `(1) the deductibles under sections 1813(a)(1) and 1814A(b) or the blood
 deductible described in section 1813(a)(2) and the second sentence of
 section 1814A(b), and
 `(2) the difference between the payment amount provided under this part
 and the payment amount that would be provided if `100 percent' and `0
 percent' were substituted for `80 percent' and `20 percent', respectively,
 each place either appears in subsections (a) and (i)(2) of section 1814A,
 in sections 1814B(a)(1)(A), 1814B(d)(1), 1814B(e)(1)(C), and 1866(a)(2)(A),
 and in subsections (b)(2) and (b)(3) of section 1881.
 `(c) CATASTROPHIC LIMITS- The catastrophic limits for the first year in
 which this section is effective is $1,500 for an individual and $2,000 for
 all members in a family. The catastrophic limits for any succeeding year
 shall be the amounts of the catastrophic limits specified in the previous
 sentence increased by a percentage equal to the percentage increase in
 the contribution and benefit base (determined under section 230) from the
 year before the year in which this section is enacted to the year before
 such succeeding year. Any such increase shall be rounded to the nearest
 multiple of $5.
 `(d) TREATMENT OF CERTAIN ORGANIZATIONS- In the case of an organization
 receiving payment under subclause (A) of section 1814A(a)(1) or under a
 reasonable cost reimbursement contract under section 1876, in applying
 subsection (a), the USHealth Board shall provide for an appropriate
 adjustment in the payment amounts otherwise made to reflect the aggregate
 increase in the payments that would otherwise be made with respect to
 enrollees in such an organization if payments were made other than under
 such clause or such a contract on an individual-by-individual basis.
 `(e) TREATMENT OF CERTAIN PREPAID ORGANIZATIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), expenses incurred
 by a beneficiary for covered out-of-pocket cost-sharing shall be counted
 (consistent with paragraph (3)) whether or not, at the time the expenses were
 incurred, the beneficiary was enrolled in a plan under section 1814A(a)(1)(A)
 or under section 1876. In this subsection, the term `covered out-of-pocket
 cost-sharing' includes deductibles and coinsurance under the plan for
 items and services covered under this part.
 `(2) BUY-OUT PLANS- In the case of a beneficiary enrolled in a month in
 a buy-out plan (as defined in paragraph (4))--
 `(A) expenses incurred by the beneficiary for items and services reimbursed
 under the plan shall not be treated as covered out-of-pocket cost-sharing
 for purposes of subsection (a), but
 `(B) the beneficiary is deemed to have incurred, for each month of such
 enrollment, expenses for covered out-of-pocket cost-sharing in an amount
 equal to the actuarial value (with respect to a month in the year involved)
 of the deductible and coinsurance amounts under this part (as computed by
 the USHealth Board for purposes of section 1876(e)(1)) applicable on the
 average to individuals in the United States.
 `(3) CONDITIONS OF CONTRACTS- The USHealth Board may not enter into a
 contract with an organization under section 1876, or provide for payment
 under section 1814A(a)(1)(A) with respect to an organization, with respect
 to a plan that is not a buy-out plan, unless the organization provides
 assurances, satisfactory to the Board, that--
 `(A) the organization will maintain and make available, for its enrollees
 and in coordination with the appropriate carriers under this part, an
 accounting of expenses incurred in each year under the plan for covered
 out-of-pocket cost-sharing (as defined paragraph (1)); and
 `(B) the organization will not undertake to charge a beneficiary during
 a year for services for which payment may be made under this part after
 the individual (or members of the family) has incurred (whether through
 the organization or otherwise) covered out-of-pocket cost-sharing in the
 year in an amount equal to the applicable catastrophic limit established
 under subsection (c) for the year.
 `(4) BUY-OUT PLAN DEFINED- In this subsection, the term `buy-out plan'
 means a plan under section 1814A(a)(1)(A) or offered by an organization
 under section 1876 and with respect to which--
 `(A) the actuarial value of the coinsurance and deductibles under the plan
 with respect to benefits under this part (as determined by the USHealth
 Board),
is less than 50 percent of--
 `(B) the actuarial value of the coinsurance and deductibles for such
 benefits for all beneficiaries (as determined by the USHealth Board)
 applicable on the average to individuals in the United States.
 `(e) BENEFICIARY DEFINED- In this section, the term `beneficiary' means,
 with respect to a month, an individual covered for benefits under this
 part for the month.'.
 (b) LIMITATION ON CHARGES WHEN CATASTROPHIC LIMIT REACHED- Section
 1866(a)(2)(A) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395cc(a)(2)(A)) is amended by adding at
 the end the following new sentence: `A provider of services may not impose
 a charge under the first sentence of this subparagraph for services for
 which payment is made to the provider pursuant to section 1814C (relating
 to catastrophic benefits).'.
SEC. 125. ADJUSTMENTS IN PAYMENTS FOR INPATIENT HOSPITAL SERVICES AND
PHYSICIANS' SERVICES TO REFLECT CHANGE IN POPULATION SERVED AND OTHER SPECIAL
CIRCUMSTANCES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- For purposes of payment for inpatient hospital services
 and physicians' services under title XVIII of the Social Security Act,
 the USHealth Board shall adjust the payment rates otherwise established
 under such title to take into account--
 (1) differences between the population served under that title as in effect
 on the date of the enactment of this Act and the population served by part
 A of such title beginning with the second year beginning after such date, and
 (2) such other appropriate factors (such as the special circumstances of
 hospitals the inpatients of which are predominantly children) as the Board
 deems appropriate.
 (b) CONSULTATION- In making adjustments under subsection (a), the USHealth
 Board shall consult with the Prospective Payment Assessment Commission
 with respect to inpatient hospital services and with the Physician Payment
 Review Commission with respect to physicians' services.
SEC. 126. EQUALIZING PAYMENT FOR OUTPATIENT MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES.
 Section 1833 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395l) is amended by
 striking subsection (c).
Subtitle B--Coverage of Employed Individuals Through Qualified Employer
Health Plans
PART 1--GENERAL PROVISIONS
SEC. 151. EMPLOYMENT-BASED HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE.
 The Social Security Act is amended by adding at the end the following
 new title:
`TITLE XXI--ACCESS TO HEALTH INSURANCE FOR HEALTH SERVICES THROUGH EMPLOYMENT
`Part A--Employer Requirement to Enroll Employees and Families in a Qualified
Employer Health Plan or in USHealth Program
`SEC. 2101. APPLICATION TO FULL-TIME EMPLOYEES.
 `(a) UNMARRIED EMPLOYEES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this part, each employer shall, in
 accordance with this title, enroll each of its full-time employees who is
 unmarried in a qualified employer health plan (or in the USHealth Program,
 if elected by the employer under section 2105).
 `(2) MULTIPLE FULL-TIME EMPLOYMENT- In the case of an unmarried individual
 who is a full-time employee of more than 1 employer--
 `(A) the individual shall elect (in a manner specified by the USHealth
 Board) the covered employer health plan (as defined in section 2121(b))
 under which the individual will be enrolled,
 `(B) the nonenrolling employer shall pay to the USHealth Board (in a
 manner specified by the Board), subject to the limit described in section
 1820(b)(1)(B), an amount equal to 40 percent of the employer actuarial rate
 (determined under section 1820(b)(2)) for enrollment under the USHealth
 Program of such an individual (and, if applicable, family members) for
 required health services in the community in the appropriate beneficiary
 class, and
 `(C) the USHealth Board shall pay to the enrolling employer (in a manner
 specified by the Board) an amount equal to the amount described in
 subparagraph (B).
 `(b) MARRIED EMPLOYEES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this part, each employer shall, in
 accordance with this title, enroll each of its full-time employees who is
 married in a qualified employer health plan (or in the USHealth Program,
 if elected by the employer under section 2105).
 `(2) BOTH FULL-TIME EMPLOYEES- In the case of married individuals, if both
 are full-time employees of 1 or more employers--
 `(A) the individuals shall elect (in a manner specified by the USHealth
 Board) the covered employer health plan in which both shall be enrolled,
 `(B) each nonenrolling employer shall pay to the USHealth Board (in a
 manner specified by the Board) an amount equal to 40 percent of the employer
 actuarial rate (determined under section 1820(b)(2)) for enrollment under
 the USHealth Program of such an individual (and family members) for required
 health services in the community in the appropriate beneficiary class, and
 `(C) the USHealth Board shall pay to the enrolling employer (in a manner
 specified by the Board) an amount equal to the amount described in
 subparagraph (B).
 `(c) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing
 the nonenrolling plan from supplementing the benefits of the enrolling plan.
 `(d) DEFINITIONS- In this section, the terms `enrolling employer' and
 `enrolling plan' mean, with respect to an individual or a married couple,
 the employer that offers the covered employer health plan in which the
 individual or couple is enrolled under subsection (a)(2)(A) or (b)(2)(A)
 and such plan, respectively, and the terms `nonenrolling employer' and
 `nonenrolling plan' mean the other employer and other covered employer
 health plan.
`SEC. 2102. APPLICATION TO PART-TIME EMPLOYEES.
 `(a) REQUIRED ENROLLMENT OR CONTRIBUTION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this part, with respect to each
 part-time employee each employer shall, in accordance with this title,
 either--
 `(A) enroll the employee (and family members) in a qualified employer
 health plan (or in the USHealth Program, if elected by the employer under
 section 2105), or
 `(B) provide for a payment to the USHealth Board in an amount equal to not
 less than the minimum amount specified in subsection (b), the amount of which
 shall be credited towards the employee's enrollment (if any) under such plan.
 `(2) MULTIPLE PART-TIME ENROLLMENT- In the case of married individuals
 either or both of whom are part-time employees of 1 or more employers--
 `(A) if they are not enrolled under a covered qualified employer health
 plan by reason of the full-time employment of their spouse and they are
 offered enrollment under 1 or more covered qualified employer plans,
 the individuals shall elect (in a manner specified by the USHealth Board)
 the covered employer health plan in which both shall be enrolled,
 `(B) each nonenrolling part-time employer shall pay to the USHealth
 Program Trust Fund (in a manner specified by the Board) an amount equal
 to 1/2 the minimum amount specified in subsection (b), and the amount of
 such payment shall be credited towards the employee's enrollment (if any)
 under the USHealth Program, and
 `(C) the USHealth Board shall pay to the enrolling employer, if any, (in
 a manner specified by the Board) an amount equal to 1/3 of the amount
 described in section 2101(b)(2)(B).
The failure of an employee to be enrolled in the USHealth Program shall not
affect the liability for, or the amount of, the payment to the plan.
 `(3) UNIFORM ELECTION- The election under paragraph (1) shall be made
 uniformly with respect to all part-time employees.
 `(b) MINIMUM CONTRIBUTION- For purposes of subsection (a)(1)(B), the
 minimum amount specified in this subsection with respect to an employee
 is the product of--
 `(1) the employer premium otherwise determined under section 1820(b), and
 `(2) the ratio of (A) the average number of hours weekly the employee is
 employed, to (B) 17 1/2 hours.
`SEC. 2103. APPLICATION TO SEASONAL AND TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in section 2104(b), in the case of an
 employee designated under paragraph (3) as a seasonal or temporary employee
 (as defined in section 2181(b)(3)), whether a part-time or full-time
 employee, instead of enrolling the employee (and family members) in the
 qualified employer health plan of the employer, the employer shall make
 a payment to the USHealth Board in an amount not less than the minimum
 amount specified in subsection (b), and the amount of such payment shall
 be credited towards the enrollment of the employee (and family members)
 under the USHealth Program. The failure of the employee to be enrolled
 in the USHealth Program shall not affect the liability for, or amount of,
 such payment to the plan.
 `(2) PLAN TRANSFERS- In the case of a seasonal or temporary employee who is
 enrolled under a qualified employer health plan under section 2101 or 2102,
 the USHealth Board shall pay to the enrolling plan (in a manner specified
 by the Board) an amount equal to--
 `(A) if the employee is normally performing service for at least 17 1/2
 hours per week as such a worker for the employer, the amount described in
 section 2101(b)(2)(B), or
 `(B) in any other case, 1/3 of such amount.
The definitions under section 2101(d) shall apply under this paragraph in
the same manner as they apply under section 2101(b)(2).
 `(3) DESIGNATION OF SEASONAL OR TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES- Each employer shall
 designate, at the time of initial employment and in a manner specified
 by the USHealth Board, whether the individual is to be treated under this
 title as a seasonal or temporary employee.
 `(4) KEEPING CONTRIBUTION IF NOT ENROLLED- A contribution is required with
 respect to an employee (and family members) under paragraph (1) regardless
 of whether or not the employee (and family members) are enrolled under
 the USHealth Program.
 `(b) MINIMUM CONTRIBUTION- The minimum amount specified in this subsection
 with respect to an employee is the amount described in section 2102(b).
`SEC. 2104. TREATMENT OF ALL FAMILY MEMBERS AS A UNIT.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- In accordance with section 2152(a), enrollment of an
 employee in a covered employer health plan shall include enrollment of
 the other family members of the employee.
 `(b) TREATMENT OF CHILDREN- In the case of an individual who is a child,
 the employer of the child--
 `(1) is not required to enroll the child in a covered employer health
 plan, but
 `(2) is required to make a payment to the USHealth program in the same
 amount as would be required under the previous sections of this part if
 the child were a single adult.
`SEC. 2105. MEETING REQUIREMENT OF ENROLLMENT IN QUALIFIED EMPLOYER HEALTH
PLAN THROUGH ENROLLMENT IN USHEALTH PROGRAM.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- In the case where an employer is required under this part
 to enroll employees (and family members) in a qualified employer health
 plan, the employer may elect to meet such requirement by entering into
 an agreement with the USHealth Board to enroll such individuals under the
 USHealth Program.
 `(b) CONTENTS OF AGREEMENT- Such agreement shall provide, among other
 things, for the following:
 `(1) The employer shall provide to the USHealth Board (in such form and
 manner as the Board may specify and no later than the date enrollment under
 a qualified employer health plan is required under this part) completed
 application forms for enrollment with the USHealth Program of employees
 (and family members) required to be enrolled under this part and covered
 under the agreement.
 `(2) The employer shall provide for payment of employer premiums (in the
 amount established under section 1820(b)) with respect to such enrollment.
 `(3) The employer shall withhold from the pay of the employee any amount
 of the employee premium applicable to such enrollment which is charged by
 the employer consistent with section 2122(b) (relating to limitation on
 employee premiums).
 `(c) ELECTION FOR FULL-TIME AND PART-TIME EMPLOYEES OR FOR PART-TIME
 EMPLOYEES ONLY- Subject to section 2104(b)(1), the election under subsection
 (a), insofar as it applies to employees who are not seasonal or temporary
 employees, shall only be available with respect to either--
 `(1) all employees (and their family members), including part-time
 employees, or
 `(2) all part-time employees (and their family members).
`SEC. 2106. APPLICATION OF REQUIREMENT TO EMPLOYERS OF DIFFERENT SIZES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- The requirements of this part apply to--
 `(1) large employers as of January 1 of the 2nd year beginning after the
 date of the enactment of this title,
 `(2) medium-size employers as of January 1 of the 3rd year beginning after
 the date of the enactment of this title, and
 `(3) small employers as of January 1 of the 4th year beginning after the
 date of the enactment of this title.
 `(b) TRANSITION FOR COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS- The requirements
 of this part shall not apply to employers with respect to their employees,
 insofar as such employees are covered under a collective bargaining agreement
 ratified before the date of the enactment of this title, earlier than the
 date of termination of such agreement (determined without regard to any
 extension thereof agreed to after the date of the enactment of this title).
`SEC. 2107. TIMING OF ENROLLMENT; PERIOD OF COVERAGE.
 `(a) TIMING OF ENROLLMENT; NOTICES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Enrollment under this part shall occur not later than
 the date on which the employment, for which such enrollment is required
 under this part, commences.
 `(2) REFERENCE TO DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENT- For requirement for disclosure
 to employees of information respecting--
 `(A) certain network plans, and
 `(B) the availability of low-income assistance under part C of title XVIII,
see section 2158(a)(2).
 `(b) PERIOD OF COVERAGE-
 `(1) BEGINNING OF COVERAGE- Coverage under a covered employer health plan
 shall begin in accordance with section 2152(b).
 `(2) TERMINATION OF COVERAGE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- If an enrollment is effected under this part on the basis
 of employment, coverage under such enrollment may be terminated, subject
 to subparagraph (B), on the last day of the month (or of any subsequent
 month) during which such employment is terminated.
 `(B) NOTICE REQUIRED- Effective on the date specified in section 2157(b)(2),
 coverage under a qualified employer health plan shall not be terminated
 unless notice has been provided to the USHealth Program, as required in
 section 2157(b)(1), of such termination at least 7 days before the last
 day of the month in which employment is terminated (or any subsequent month).
 `(3) TREATMENT OF FAMILY MEMBERS- Subject to section 2152, the period of
 coverage for family members of an employee shall be the same as the period
 of coverage for the employee.
`SEC. 2108. ENFORCEMENT.
 `(a) COMPLAINTS AND INVESTIGATIONS- The USHealth Board shall establish
 procedures--
 `(1) for individuals and entities to file written, signed complaints
 respecting potential violations of the requirements of this part,
 `(2) for the investigation of those complaints which, on their face,
 have a substantial probability of validity, and
 `(3) for the investigation of such other violations of the requirements
 of this part as the Board determines to be appropriate.
For purposes of this paragraph, the designation as a seasonal or temporary
employee under section 2103(a)(3) of an individual who is employed for periods
in excess of the period permitted under section 2181(b)(3) constitutes a
violation of the requirements of this part.
 `(b) AUTHORITY IN INVESTIGATIONS- In conducting investigations and hearings
 under this section--
 `(1) agents of the USHealth Board and administrative law judges shall
 have reasonable access to examine evidence of any person or entity being
 investigated, and
 `(2) administrative law judges, may, if necessary, compel by subpoena the
 attendance of witnesses and the production of evidence at any designated
 place or hearing.
In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena lawfully issued under
this subsection and upon application of the Board an appropriate district
court of the United States may issue an order requiring compliance with such
subpoena and any failure to obey such order may be punished by such court
as a contempt thereof.
 `(c) HEARING-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Before imposing an order described in subsection (d) against
 an employer under this section for a violation of the requirements of this
 part, the Board shall provide the employer with notice and, upon request
 made within a reasonable time (of not less than 30 days, as established
 by the Board) of the date of the notice, a hearing respecting the violation.
 `(2) CONDUCT OF HEARING- Any hearing so requested shall be conducted
 before an administrative law judge under section 201. If no hearing is so
 requested, the Board's imposition of the order shall constitute a final
 and unappealable order.
 `(3) ISSUANCE OF ORDERS- If the administrative law judge determines, upon
 the preponderance of the evidence received, that an employer named in the
 complaint has violated the requirements of this part, the administrative
 law judge shall state the findings of fact and issue and cause to be served
 on such employer an order described in subsection (d).
 `(d) CEASE AND DESIST ORDER WITH CIVIL MONEY PENALTY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this subsection,
 the order under this subsection--
 `(A) shall require the employer--
 `(i) to cease and desist from such violations, and
 `(ii) to pay a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed 3 times the amount
 of premiums which the employer would be required to pay to enroll all
 individuals (otherwise required under this part to be enrolled under a
 qualified employer health plan) under the USHealth Program for a period
 of not less than 1 year; and
 `(B) may require the employer to take such other remedial action as is
 appropriate.
 `(2) CORRECTIONS WITHIN 30 DAYS- No order shall be imposed under this
 section by reason of any violation if the employer establishes to the
 satisfaction of the Board that--
 `(A) such violation was due to reasonable cause and not to willful
 neglect, and
 `(B) such violation is corrected within the 30-day period beginning on
 earliest date the employer knew, or exercising reasonable diligence could
 have known, that such a violation was occurring.
 `(3) WAIVER BY BOARD- In the case of a violation which is due to reasonable
 cause and not to willful neglect, the Board may waive part or all of
 the civil money penalty imposed by paragraph (1)(A)(ii) to the extent
 that payment of such penalty would be grossly excessive relative to the
 violation involved and to the need for deterrence of violations.
 `(4) STATE LOSS OF FUNDS- In the case of an employer that is a State or
 political subdivision of a State or an agency or instrumentality of a State
 or political subdivision and that violates the requirements of this part,
 instead of imposing a civil money penalty under paragraph (1)(A)(ii),
 there shall be imposed an order reducing payments to the State (in which
 the violation occurs), under title IV, V, XIX, or XX (as specified by the
 Board), in an amount equivalent to the amount of the civil money penalty
 that otherwise would be imposed in the case of other employers.
 `(e) ADMINISTRATIVE APPELLATE REVIEW- The decision and order of an
 administrative law judge shall become the final agency decision and order
 of the Board unless, within 30 days, the Board modifies or vacates the
 decision and order, in which case the decision and order of the Board
 shall become a final order under this section.
 `(f) JUDICIAL REVIEW- An employer adversely affected by a final order
 issued under this section may, within 45 days after the date the final
 order is issued, file a petition in the Court of Appeals for the appropriate
 circuit for review of the order.
 `(g) ENFORCEMENT OF ORDERS- If an employer fails to comply with a final
 order issued under this section against the employer, the Board shall file
 a suit to seek compliance with the order in any appropriate district court
 of the United States. In any such suit, the validity and appropriateness
 of the final order shall not be subject to review.
 `(h) USE OF AMOUNTS COLLECTED- Civil money penalties collected under this
 section shall be credited to the USHealth Program Trust Fund.
 (i) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this part shall be construed as superseding
 enforcement provisions under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of
 1974, insofar as they may apply to employee welfare benefit plans meeting
 requirements of this title.
`Part B--Requirements for Qualified Employer Health Plans
`SEC. 2121. QUALIFIED EMPLOYER HEALTH PLAN AND COVERED EMPLOYER HEALTH
PLAN DEFINED.
 `(a) QUALIFIED EMPLOYER HEALTH PLAN DEFINED- In this title and title XVIII,
 the term `qualified employer health plan' means an employment-related
 health plan (as defined in section 2704(a)(2) of the Public Health Service
 Act) that--
 `(1) is a qualified health plan (as defined in section 2151(a)),
 `(2) except as provided in section 2122, does not impose premiums,
 deductibles, or copayments on employees (and family members) required to
 be enrolled in a covered employer health plan under part A, and
 `(3) meets the requirements of section 1853(c)(3) (relating to coordination
 of low-income assistance for deductibles).
Such term does not include the USHealth Program.
 `(b) COVERED EMPLOYER HEALTH PLAN DEFINED- In this title, the term `covered
 employer health plan' means, with respect to employees (and family members)
 whom an employer is required to enroll under part A, the qualified employer
 health plan in which they are enrolled or, in the case of an election
 with respect to such employees (and family members) under section 2105,
 the USHealth Program.
`SEC. 2122. REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO EMPLOYEE PREMIUMS AND COST-SHARING.
 `(a) ENROLLEE PREMIUMS AND COST-SHARING PERMITTED-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A qualified employer health plan may require an enrollee
 to pay for--
 `(A) premiums for coverage under the plan, but only if the premiums do
 not exceed the limitations imposed under this section, and
 `(B) cost-sharing amounts for coverage under the plan, but only if the
 cost-sharing does not exceed the limitations on deductibles, copayments,
 and coinsurance imposed with respect to qualified health plans under
 section 2155.
 `(2) TREATMENT OF ADDITIONAL COVERAGE WHICH IS NOT OPTIONAL FOR EMPLOYEE-
 If a qualified employer health plan provides benefits in addition to the
 benefits required under this title and the employee is not permitted the
 option of not accepting such additional benefits, the plan--
 `(A) may not impose a premium, for such basic and additional benefits,
 that exceeds the premiums that may be imposed for the basic benefits, and
 `(B) shall assure that cost-sharing is not imposed with respect to required
 health services once the applicable cost-sharing limit has been reached
 in a year with respect to benefits for such services.
 `(3) NONDISCRIMINATION IN PREMIUM AMOUNTS- Under a qualified employer
 health plan, no employee may be charged a different premium for similar
 benefits in the same covered employer health plan for the same beneficiary
 class based on the age or sex of the employee.
 `(b) LIMITATION ON PREMIUMS-
 `(1) MONTHLY PREMIUM LIMITED TO 20 PERCENT OF ACTUARIAL RATE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- A qualified employer health plan may not require an
 employee to pay a premium--
 `(i) for coverage for a period of longer than one month, or
 `(ii) the amount of which on a monthly basis exceeds 20 percent of the
 monthly actuarial rate (as defined under subparagraph (B)).
 `(B) MONTHLY ACTUARIAL RATE DEFINED- For purposes of this subsection,
 the term `monthly actuarial rate' means--
 `(i) with respect to a qualified employer health plan in a plan year, the
 average monthly per enrollee amount that the plan estimates, for enrollees
 under the plan during the year, would be necessary to pay for the total
 benefits required during the year under the plan (with respect to required
 health services), including administrative costs for the provision of such
 benefits and an appropriate amount for a contingency margin, or
 `(ii) with respect to the USHealth Program, the beneficiary actuarial rate
 (established under section 1820(a)(2)) applicable to required health
 services in the community with respect to the beneficiary class which
 describes the employee's enrollment.
 `(C) APPLICATION ON BASIS OF FAMILY STATUS- For purposes of subparagraph
 (B)(i), a qualified employer health plan may provide for the premium to be
 applied, and the monthly actuarial rate described in such subparagraph to
 be estimated, for required health services based on the beneficiary classes
 described in section 1820(d) or on such other beneficiary classifications,
 consistent with subsection (a), as the employer or plan may specify.
 `(3) LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT OF PREMIUMS- An employee enrolled under a
 qualified employer health plan is liable for payment of premiums required
 under that plan in accordance with this subsection. In no case shall
 an employee be liable for premiums with respect to a qualified employer
 health plan, other than the portion of the premium which may be imposed
 on the employee consistent with this section.
 `(4) WITHHOLDING PERMITTED- No provision of State law shall prevent an
 employer of an employee enrolled under a qualified employer health plan
 from withholding the amount of any premium due by the employee under this
 subsection from the wages paid the employee.
 `(5) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this section shall be construed--
 `(A) as preventing an employer from paying part or all of the employee
 premium for required health services or other health services, or
 `(B) subject to subsection (a), from requiring an employee to pay for
 all or part of the premium for benefits for services other than required
 health services.
`SEC. 2123. OPTION OF ELECTION OF USHEALTH PROGRAM RULES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- If a qualified employer health plan elects, in a form and
 manner specified by the USHealth Board, this section to apply with respect to
 the plan, no provider or practitioner which provides required health services
 to an individual covered under the plan may impose charges for such services
 that exceed the amount of charges that the provider or practitioner may have
 imposed with respect to such services if the individual were entitled to
 benefits under title XVIII. However, the provisions of section 1816A(g)(3)
 (as redesignated by section 122(b) of the USHealth Program Act of 1991)
 shall not be considered to apply under this subsection.
 `(b) ENFORCEMENT- The enforcement provisions of title XVIII shall apply
 to a violation of subsection (a) in the same manner as they apply to a
 violation of the corresponding requirement in such title.
 `(c) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing
 a qualified employer health plan from providing for payment amounts which
 are less than the payment amounts provided under the USHealth Program.
`Part C--Standards for Qualified Health Plans
`SEC. 2151. CERTIFICATION OF QUALIFIED HEALTH PLANS.
 `(a) QUALIFIED HEALTH PLAN DEFINED- For purposes of this title and title
 XVIII, the term `qualified health plan'--
 `(1) means a health plan that the USHealth Board certifies, upon application
 by the plan, to meet the requirements of this part, and
 `(2) includes, unless the context indicates otherwise, the USHealth Program
 under title XVIII.
 `(b) DEEMED CERTIFICATION- The USHealth Board shall establish a procedure
 under which an insured health plan (as defined by the Board), other than
 a qualified employer health plan covering public employees, issued in a
 State shall be deemed to be certified under subsection (a)(1) with respect
 to that State if the applicable regulatory authority (as defined in section
 2703(c)(1) of the Public Health Service Act) certifies that the plan meets
 the requirements for certification under this part.
 `(c) REVIEW AND RECERTIFICATION- The USHealth Board shall establish
 procedures for the periodic review and recertification of plans as qualified
 health plans.
 `(d) TERMINATION OF CERTIFICATION- The USHealth Board shall terminate the
 certification of a qualified health plan if the Board determines--
 `(1) in the case of a plan deemed certified under subsection (b), that
 the applicable regulatory authority has terminated its certification of
 the plan, or
 `(2) in the case of any plan, that the plan no longer meets the requirements
 for certification.
Before effecting a termination under paragraph (2), the Board shall provide
the plan notice and opportunity for a hearing on the proposed termination.
`SEC. 2152. TREATMENT OF FAMILY AS A UNIT; COVERAGE PERIOD; HEALTH PLAN CARDS.
 `(a) TREATMENT OF FAMILY AS A UNIT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraph (2), enrollment of an individual in a
 qualified health plan shall include enrollment of the other family members
 (as defined in section 2181(d)(1)) of the individual.
 `(2) TREATMENT OF INELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS- Nothing in paragraph (1) shall
 be construed as requiring a qualified health plan (or permitting the
 USHealth Program) to enroll individuals who are not eligible individuals
 (described in section 1806(a)(1)(A)).
 `(b) BEGINNING OF COVERAGE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In the case of an individual enrolled under any qualified
 health plan, subject to subsection (c), the benefits under the plan shall
 first become available for services furnished beginning on the first day
 of the month following the month of enrollment.
 `(2) SPECIAL RULES- The USHealth Board shall provide for such standards
 as may be necessary to provide for the allocation of responsibility among
 qualified health plans in the case of an inpatient hospital stay, or in the
 case in which a single payment amount if made for other services provided
 over a period of time, that begins during the period of coverage under one
 qualified health plan and ends during a period of coverage under another
 qualified health plan.
 `(c) STANDARDS TO REFLECT CHANGES IN FAMILY AND EMPLOYMENT STATUS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Under standards established by the USHealth Board consistent
 with this subsection, qualified health plans shall provide for appropriate
 changes in the coverage of family members to take into account--
 `(A) changes in family composition or status, including marriage, divorce
 (or legal separation), birth or adoption of children, and the aging of
 children into adulthood, and
 `(B) changes in employment status.
 `(2) MONTHLY CHANGES- Except as specifically provided in this subsection,
 such standards shall be designed--
 `(A) to effect a change in enrollment (or status of enrollment) as of the
 first day of the first month (or, in order to provide for notice and an
 opportunity for coordination among plans, a later month) following the
 date of the event causing the change,
 `(B) to prevent any periods of noncoverage under any qualified health
 plans, and
 `(C) to provide, in the case of a change of family status such as marriage,
 divorce, or legal separation, for accounting and crediting of cost-sharing
 among family members (described in section 2157(c)) in an equitable and
 administrable manner.
 `(3) TREATMENT OF NEWBORNS-
 `(A) BIRTH TO WOMAN DURING PERIOD OF COVERAGE- Any child born to a woman
 during the period of coverage under a qualified health plan shall, as
 of the date of birth, be automatically enrolled and covered for benefits
 under the plan.
 `(B) BIRTH TO WOMAN WITHOUT COVERAGE- Any child born in the United States
 to a woman who is not, at the time of birth, enrolled under a qualified
 health plan shall be automatically enrolled and covered for benefits under
 part A of title XVIII as of the date of birth if an application for such
 enrollment is made not later than 60 days after the date of birth or,
 if later, the end of the year in which the child is born.
 `(4) ADOPTION-
 `(A) TREATMENT OF VOLUNTARY RELINQUISHMENT- Any child who is voluntarily
 relinquished to a public or private agency shall, upon the application by the
 agency, be enrolled under part A of title XVIII and covered as of the date
 of the relinquishment, until the date of the child's placement for adoption.
 `(B) TREATMENT OF ADOPTED CHILDREN- Any child who is placed for adoption
 with an individual during the period the individual is enrolled and covered
 under a qualified health plan shall, as of the date of the placement for
 adoption, be treated as the child of the individual and be automatically
 enrolled and covered under such plan.
 `(5) PLACEMENT IN CUSTODY OF PUBLIC AGENCY PURSUANT TO COURT ORDER
 OR OTHERWISE- Any child who is removed from the family and placed in
 the temporary custody of a public agency pursuant to a court order or
 otherwise shall, upon application by the public agency on or after the
 date of the removal and placement with the public agency, be deemed to
 be automatically enrolled and covered for benefits under part A of title
 XVIII as of the date of the application, until the child is returned to
 the family or placed for adoption.
 `(6) TREATMENT OF LEGAL WARDS, FOSTER CHILDREN, ETC- In cases not described
 in paragraphs (4) or (5), the USHealth Board shall establish standards
 relating to the time an individual described in section 2181(d)(4)(B)(ii)
 is treated as the child of the person with custody and such other standards
 as may be necessary to assure the proper coordination of enrollment of
 children and other individuals among qualified health plans.
 `(d) HEALTH PLAN CARDS- In conjunction with enrollment of individuals
 under a qualified health plan, the plan shall provide for the issuance of
 a card which may be used for purposes of identification of such enrollment
 and the processing of claims for benefits under the plan. Such card shall--
 `(1) identify (as appropriate) the types of benefits to which the individual
 is entitled under the plan, and
 `(2) contain such other information as the USHealth Board (and the plan)
 shall specify.
`SEC. 2153. REQUIREMENTS RESPECTING BASIC BENEFITS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Each qualified health plan must provide for benefits for
 at least all required health services (as defined in section 2181(e)(1)).
 `(b) TREATMENT OF ADDITIONAL BENEFITS- Nothing in this section shall be
 construed as preventing a qualified health plan from including benefits
 in addition to benefits for required health services.
 `(c) LIMITATION ON PROVIDERS AND PRACTITIONERS PERMITTED ONLY IN NETWORK
 PLANS- A qualified health plan (other than the USHealth Program) may limit
 the number of providers or practitioners for which benefits for required
 health services are paid only if the plan is a network plan (as defined
 in section 2731(a) of the Public Health Service Act).
 `(d) TREATMENT OF USHEALTH PROGRAM- In applying subsection (a) with respect
 to the USHealth Program, the provisions of part B are deemed to supersede
 such subsection.
`SEC. 2154. REQUIREMENTS RESPECTING LIMITS ON PREEXISTING CONDITION EXCLUSIONS
AND COVERAGE STANDARDS FOR REQUIRED HEALTH SERVICES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided under subsection (b), a qualified
 health plan--
 `(1) may not deny, limit, or condition the coverage under (or benefits of)
 the plan with respect to required health services based on the health
 status, claims experience, receipt of health care, medical history, or
 lack of evidence of insurability, of an individual, and
 `(2) may not provide for exclusions from coverage for required health
 services that are more restrictive than the exclusions applicable to such
 services under part A of title XVIII.
 `(b) TREATMENT OF PRE-EXISTING CONDITION EXCLUSIONS FOR ALL SERVICES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this subsection,
 a qualified health plan (other than the USHealth Program) may exclude
 coverage with respect to services related to treatment of a preexisting
 condition, but the period of such exclusion may not exceed 6 months.
 `(2) NONAPPLICATION TO NEWBORNS AND SUNSET OF PRE-EXISTING CONDITION
 EXCLUSIONS FOR REQUIRED HEALTH SERVICES- The exclusion of coverage permitted
 under paragraph (1) shall not apply to--
 `(A) services furnished to newborns, or
 `(B) required health services furnished on or after July 1 of the 6th year
 beginning after the date of the enactment of this title.
 `(3) CREDITING OF PREVIOUS COVERAGE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- If an individual is in a period of continuous coverage
 (as defined in subparagraph (B)(i)) with respect to particular services
 as of the date of initial coverage under a plan, any period of exclusion
 of coverage with respect to a preexisting condition for such services or
 type of services shall be reduced by 1 month for each month in the period
 of continuous coverage.
 `(B) DEFINITIONS- In this paragraph:
 `(i) PERIOD OF CONTINUOUS COVERAGE- The term `period of continuous coverage'
 means, with respect to particular services, the period beginning on the
 date an individual is enrolled under a health plan or program (including
 a qualified health plan, a Federal health plan, a State plan under title
 XIX, or a State general medical assistance program) which provides the
 same or substantially similar benefits with respect to such services and
 ends on the date the individual is not so enrolled for a continuous period
 of more than 3 months.
 `(ii) PREEXISTING CONDITION- The term `preexisting condition' means, with
 respect to coverage under a plan, a condition which has been diagnosed or
 treated during the 3-month period ending on the day before the first date
 of such coverage, except that such term does not include a condition which
 was first diagnosed or treated during a period of continuous coverage.
 `(C) STANDARDS FOR SIMILAR BENEFITS- The USHealth Board, in consultation
 with the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, shall establish
 such criteria for determining if benefits are substantially similar as
 may be necessary to carry out this subsection.
`SEC. 2155. REQUIREMENTS RESPECTING LIMITS ON COST-SHARING.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in subsection (b), a qualified health
 plan may not impose deductibles, copayments, or coinsurance with respect
 to required health services in excess of the deductible and coinsurance
 permitted under part A of title XVIII with respect to such services (not
 taking into account any low-income assistance provided under part C of
 such title).
 `(b) EXCEPTION FOR NETWORK PLANS- In the case of a qualified health plan
 that is a network plan (as defined in section 2731(a) of the Public Health
 Service Act), the limitations on deductibles, copayments, and coinsurance
 under paragraph (1) shall not apply to services furnished other than by
 participating providers, except that such limitations shall continue to
 apply to services that are medically necessary and that are required to be
 provided immediately because of an unforeseen illness, injury, or condition.
 `(c) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing
 a qualified health plan from providing for deductibles, coinsurance,
 and copayments or other restrictions with respect to services other than
 required health services that are different from those permitted with
 respect to required health services.
 `(d) TREATMENT OF USHEALTH PROGRAM- In applying subsection (a) with respect
 to the USHealth Program, the provisions of part A of title XVIII are deemed
 to supersede such subsection.
`SEC. 2156. PAYMENT RATES.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- A qualified health plan (whether or not a health maintenance
 organization) shall make payment for required health services based on
 the payment rates established under title XVIII.
 `(b) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this section shall be construed as affecting
 the rates that health maintenance organizations pay for facilities or
 personnel owned or salaried or otherwise controlled by such organizations.
`SEC. 2157. COORDINATION AND PORTABILITY OF HEALTH COVERAGE UNDER QUALIFIED
HEALTH PLANS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL- Each qualified health plan shall provide for coordination
 of--
 `(1) enrollment and termination of enrollment among the qualified health
 plans and title XVIII, and
 `(2) application of deductibles and limitations on cost-sharing among such
 qualified health plans,
in accordance with standards established by the USHealth Board consistent
with this section.
 `(b) REQUIREMENT OF NOTICES WITH RESPECT TO COVERAGE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each qualified health plan shall provide notice at the
 time an individual's coverage under the plan begins or is terminated. Such
 notice shall be provided (in a form and manner and at a time specified by
 the USHealth Board)--
 `(A) to the individual (or in the case of enrollment only of a child or
 children, to the parent enrolling the child or children), and
 `(B) effective (on the date specified in paragraph (2)) to the Board.
The notice under this paragraph shall include the names and other identifying
information of family members whose coverage is affected by the change.
 `(2) DATE OF REQUIREMENT FOR NOTICE TO USHEALTH BOARD- The date specified
 in this paragraph is January 1 of the 2nd year beginning after the date
 of the enactment of this title.
 `(3) NOTICE TO BENEFICIARY AND OTHER QUALIFIED HEALTH PLANS UPON OBTAINING
 COVERAGE- In the case of an individual who begins coverage under a qualified
 employer health plan (or under part A of title XVIII on an employment
 basis), when the Board receives notice under paragraph (1)(B)--
 `(A) if, at the time of obtaining such coverage, the individual is
 enrolled on a non-employment basis in the USHealth Program for required
 health services, the Board shall notify the individual that coverage for
 such services on such a basis or for such benefits shall be terminated
 effective on the date of coverage under such a plan, and
 `(B) the Board shall provide for notice to any other qualified health plan
 in which the Board knows the individual is enrolled of the fact of such
 new coverage.
 `(4) NOTICES OF TERMINATION- Each notice of termination under paragraph
 (1) shall include--
 `(A) the effective date of the termination,
 `(B) in the case of notice to the Board, sufficient information to permit
 enrollment of the individuals affected under the USHealth Program, and
 `(C) in the case of an individual whose coverage under the plan is terminated
 other than at the end of a calendar year, the accounting statement produced
 under subsection (c)(2).
 `(c) ACCOUNTING FOR COST-SHARING-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each qualified health plan shall provide for an ongoing
 accounting, for each enrollee (and enrolled family members) on a calendar
 year basis, of expenses incurred for required health services that are
 counted towards the deductibles established under sections 1813 and 1814A
 and that are counted towards the cost-sharing limit established under
 section 1814C. The amount credited for each account shall be determined
 in accordance with standards established by the USHealth Board in order to
 provide consistency among qualified health plans and to promote portability
 of benefits across qualified health plans.
 `(2) STATEMENT OF ACCOUNT BALANCE- In the case of an individual whose
 coverage under the plan is terminated other than at the end of a calendar
 year, the qualified health plan shall produce an accounting statement
 (in a uniform manner established by the USHealth Board) of the amounts
 that are credited under the plan towards such deductible and cost-sharing
 limitations for the year for each enrollee (and family members) involved,
 in accordance with the accounting under paragraph (1).
 `(3) CREDITING OF PREVIOUS EXPENSES TOWARDS DEDUCTIBLES AND COINSURANCE-
 Each qualified health plan shall, in the case of an individual who is
 enrolled under the plan after the beginning of a year, credit, against
 the deductible and cost-sharing limit for required health services under
 its plan, the amounts previously accounted against the deductible and
 cost-sharing limit under another qualified health plan for the calendar
 year. The credit under this subparagraph shall be based on the accounting
 statement produced under paragraph (2).
 `(d) COVERAGE UNDER USHEALTH PROGRAM-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this subsection, the USHealth
 Program shall enroll each eligible individual whose coverage under another
 qualified health plan is terminated, effective on the date following the
 effective date of termination of coverage under such plan.
 `(2) OBTAINING ALTERNATE COVERAGE- Paragraph (1) shall not apply if the
 individual provides satisfactory evidence that the individual has obtained
 coverage through another qualified health plan.
 `(3) NO AUTOMATIC ENROLLMENT DURING TRANSITION- Paragraph (1) shall not
 apply to terminations occurring before January 1 of the 4th year beginning
 after the date of the enactment of this title.
`SEC. 2158. CONSUMER PROTECTIONS.
 `(a) DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS-
 `(1) FOR PLANS SOLD TO INDIVIDUALS- In the case of a qualified health
 plan that is offered to an individual, other than as enrollment under a
 qualified employer health plan, the plan may not be issued or sold to the
 individual unless the individual has been provided a written statement
 containing at least the following:
 `(A) A description of the benefits covered in the plan and cost-sharing
 required with respect to such benefits.
 `(B) A comparison of the benefits and cost-sharing described in subparagraph
 (A) with the benefits and cost-sharing available to individuals enrolled in
 the USHealth Program under part A of title XVIII (not taking into account
 any low-income assistance under part C of such title).
 `(C) The premiums charged under the plan, and a comparison of such premiums
 with the premiums charged for enrollment under the USHealth Program under
 part A of title XVIII (not taking into account any low-income assistance
 under such part C).
 `(D) A statement that no low-income assistance is available under such
 part C with respect to individuals who purchase such a plan, but that such
 assistance may be available under such part with respect to individuals
 who are enrolled under the USHealth Program or under a qualified employer
 health plan.
 `(E) A statement that, effective on January 1 of the 2nd year beginning
 after the date of the enactment of this title, individuals who are not
 full-time employees (or their family members) are eligible to enroll on
 a non-employment basis under the USHealth Program.
 `(F) A description of any pre-existing condition limitations that are
 applied under the plan, either with respect to required health services
 or other health services.
 `(G) If the plan restricts the providers or practitioners from which
 individuals may obtain covered benefits or is a network plan, a statement
 describing (i) how the choice of providers practitioners affects payment of
 benefits under the plan and (ii) the coverage under the plan of out-of-area
 services and of emergency services and urgently needed care.
 `(H) If the plan includes a utilization review program, a statement (in
 accordance with any standards established under section 2732(b) of the
 Public Health Service Act) describing such program.
 `(2) FOR EMPLOYER PLANS-
 `(A) NETWORK PLAN- In the case of a qualified health plan that is offered
 to an employer as a qualified employer health plan and that--
 `(i) restricts the providers or practitioners from which enrollees may
 obtain covered benefits, or
 `(ii) is a network plan,
the plan may not be issued or sold to the employer unless the covered employees
have been provided, by the plan or employer, a statement that describes (I)
how the choice of providers or practitioners affects payment of benefits
under the plan and (II) the coverage under the plan of out-of-area services
and of emergency services and urgently needed care.
 `(B) NOTICE OF AVAILABILITY OF LOW-INCOME ASSISTANCE- At the time of
 enrollment of an employee under a qualified employer health plan, the plan
 (directly or through the employer) shall provide the employee with a notice
 (in a form specified by the USHealth Board) of the low-income assistance
 available under part C of title XVIII with respect to enrollment under
 the plan.
 `(3) FOR SMALL EMPLOYER PLANS- In the case of a qualified employer health
 plan that is offered to a small employer, the plan may not be issued or
 sold to the employer unless the employer has been provided, in addition
 to any information required to be disclosed under paragraph (2), the
 following information:
 `(A) A description of the benefits covered in the plan and cost-sharing
 required with respect to such benefits.
 `(B) A comparison of the benefits and cost-sharing described in subparagraph
 (A) with the benefits and cost-sharing available to employers that elect
 to enroll their employees (and employees' family members) in the USHealth
 Program (not taking into account any low-income assistance under part C
 of title XVIII).
 `(C) A statement that premiums charged an employer with respect to
 enrollment of employees (and their family members) under the USHealth
 Program are limited to a percentage of payroll of covered employees.
 `(D) A statement that, effective on January 1 of the 2nd year beginning
 after the date of the enactment of this title, small employers may enroll
 employees (and their families) directly on an employment basis under the
 USHealth Program.
 `(4) STANDARD FORMAT- The disclosures under paragraphs (1), (2), and
 (3) shall be made in a uniform format established by the USHealth Board,
 after consultation with the National Association of Insurance Commissioners.
 `(5) VIOLATIONS- Any entity that issues or sells a qualified health
 plan in violation of paragraph (1), (2), or (3) is subject to a civil
 money penalty of an amount not to exceed $5,000 with respect to each such
 issuance or sale. The provisions of section 1128A (other than the first
 sentence of subsection (a) and other than subsection (b)) shall apply to
 a civil money penalty under the previous sentence in the same manner as
 such provisions apply to a penalty or proceeding under section 1128A(a).
 `(6) TREATMENT OF USHEALTH PROGRAM- This subsection shall not apply to
 the USHealth Program.
 `(b) EFFECTIVE GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each qualified health plan shall provide for effective
 procedures for hearing and resolving grievances between the plan and
 individuals enrolled under the plan.
 `(2) TREATMENT OF USHEALTH PROGRAM- In applying paragraph (1) with respect
 to the USHealth Program, the provisions of title XVIII are deemed to meet
 the requirement specified in such paragraph.
 `(c) RESTRICTION ON CERTAIN PHYSICIAN INCENTIVE PLANS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A health plan is not a qualified health plan if it
 operates a physician incentive plan (as defined in paragraph (2)) unless the
 requirements specified in clauses (i) through (iii) of section 1876(i)(8)(A)
 are met (in the same manner as they apply to eligible organizations under
 section 1876).
 `(2) PHYSICIAN INCENTIVE PLAN DEFINED- In this subsection, the term
 `physician incentive plan' means any compensation or other financial
 arrangement between the qualified health plan and a physician or physician
 group that may directly or indirectly have the effect of reducing or limiting
 services provided with respect to individuals enrolled under the plan.
 `(d) ENROLLEE FINANCIAL PROTECTION-
 `(1) SOLVENCY PROTECTION FOR INSURED PLANS- In the case of a qualified
 health plan that is an insured plan (as defined by the USHealth Board)
 and is issued in a State, in order for the plan to be certified under
 this part the Board must find that the State has established satisfactory
 protection of enrollees with respect to potential insolvency.
 `(2) PROTECTION AGAINST PROVIDER CLAIMS- In the case of a failure of a
 qualified health plan to make payments with respect to required health
 services, under standards established by the USHealth Board, an individual
 who is enrolled under the plan is not liable to any health care provider
 or practitioner with respect to the provision of required health services
 for payments in excess of the amount for which the enrollee would have
 been liable if the plan were to have made payments in a timely manner.
`SEC. 2159. PREEMPTION OF CERTAIN STATE AND FEDERAL REQUIREMENTS.
 `(a) BENEFIT AND COVERAGE RULES- Effective as of January 1 of the applicable
 year (as defined in subsection (b)), no State shall establish or enforce
 any law or regulation that--
 `(1) requires the offering, as part of a qualified health plan, of any
 services, category of care, or services of any class or type of provider that
 is different from the benefits required to be provided under section 2153,
 `(2) specifies the individuals to be covered under a qualified health plan
 or the duration of such coverage, or
 `(3) requires a right of conversion from a qualified employer health plan
 to an individual qualified health plan.
 `(b) APPLICABLE YEAR DEFINED- In this section, the term `applicable year'
 means, with respect to a qualified employer health plan, the 2nd year
 beginning after the date of the enactment of this title.
 `(c) STATE DEFINED- In this section, the term `State' includes the District
 of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and
 the Northern Mariana Islands.
`Part D--Definitions and Miscellaneous
`SEC. 2181. DEFINITIONS.
 `(a) EMPLOYEE, EMPLOYER, EMPLOYMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In this title, except as otherwise provided in this section,
 the terms `employer', `employee', and `employment' have the same meanings
 as such terms have for purposes of chapter 21 of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986.
 `(2) TREATMENT OF FEDERAL EMPLOYMENT- In applying paragraph (1), the term
 `employment' shall not be considered to include service performed in the
 employ of the United States if, in connection with the performance of such
 service, the individual--
 `(A) is enrolled in a health benefits plan under chapter 89 of title 5,
 United States Code, or
 `(B) is provided medical and dental benefits under chapter 55 of title 10,
 United States Code.
 `(b) DEFINITIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES- In this title:
 `(1) FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE- The term `full-time employee' means, with respect
 to an employer, an employee who normally performs on a monthly basis at
 least 17 1/2 hours of service per week for that employer.
 `(2) PART-TIME EMPLOYEE- The term `part-time employee' means, with respect
 to an employer, an employee who is not a full-time employee.
 `(3) SEASONAL OR TEMPORARY EMPLOYEE- The term `seasonal or temporary
 employee' means, with respect to an employer, an employee who is employed
 by the employer for not more than 4 months in any 12 month period; except
 that the USHealth Board may extend such period for up to 6 months in any
 12 month period in the case of employment that is sporadic, irregular,
 and seasonal in nature.
 `(4) TREATMENT OF CONSULTANTS AND CONTRACTORS- The term `employee' includes
 an individual who is a consultant or contractor of an employer if the
 USHealth Board determines that the consulting arrangement or contract was
 entered into to avoid the requirements of this title.
 `(5) EXCLUSION OF FOREIGN EMPLOYMENT- The term `employee' does not include
 an individual--
 `(A) who is not a citizen or resident of the United States with respect
 to service performed outside the United States, or
 `(B) who is a citizen or resident of the United States with respect to
 services performed outside the United States for an employer other than an
 American employer (as defined in section 3121(h) of the Internal Revenue
 Code of 1986).
 `(c) DEFINITIONS RELATING TO SIZE OF EMPLOYER- In this title:
 `(1) SMALL EMPLOYER- The term `small employer' means, with respect to a
 calendar year, an employer that normally employs fewer than 25 employees
 on a typical business day during the calendar year.
 `(2) MEDIUM-SIZE EMPLOYER- The term `medium-size employer' means, with
 respect to a calendar year, an employer that normally employs at least
 25, but fewer than 101, employees on a typical business day during the
 calendar year.
 `(3) LARGE EMPLOYER- The term `large employer' means an employer that is
 not a small employer or a medium-size employer.
 `(4) APPLICATION OF CONTROLLED GROUP RULES- For purposes of section
 2106(d) and of determining if an employer is a small, medium-size, or
 large employer or the number of hours an individual is normally employed
 with respect to an employer, rules similar to the rules of subsection (b)
 and (c) of section 414 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall apply.
 `(d) DEFINITIONS RELATING TO FAMILIES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), the terms `family'
 and `family member' mean an individual and the individual's spouse, and
 includes all the individual's children.
 `(2) SPOUSE- The term `spouse' means, with respect to an individual,
 the individual to which the individual is married.
 `(3) MARRIED; UNMARRIED- Marital status shall be determined in accordance
 with section 7703 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
 `(4) CHILD- The term `child' means, with respect to a person who is not
 a child, an individual--
 `(A) who (i) is unmarried and under 18 years of age, (ii) is unmarried and
 under 23 years of age and a full-time student, or (iii) is an unmarried,
 dependent child, regardless of age, who is incapable of self-support
 because of mental or physical disability which existed before age 22;
 `(B)(i) who is the child of the person or the person's spouse, or
 `(ii) who is the legal ward of the person or the person's spouse; and
 `(C) who is not in the legal custody of another individual.
The USHealth Board shall establish, by regulation, such rules as are
appropriate with respect to the treatment of foster children, emancipated
minors, children in the process of adoption, and other unmarried individuals
under 23 years of age under similar circumstances as children for purposes
of this title.
 `(5) ADULT- The term `adult' means an individual who is not a child.
 `(e) Other Definitions-
 `(1) REQUIRED HEALTH SERVICES- The term `required health services' means
 health services provided under part A of title XVIII.
 `(2) USHEALTH PROGRAM- The term `USHealth Program' means the program of
 health insurance benefits under title XVIII.'.
SEC. 152. DEDUCTION FOR HEALTH INSURANCE COSTS OF SELF-EMPLOYED.
 (a) AMOUNT DEDUCTIBLE INCREASED TO 100 PERCENT- Paragraph (1) of section
 162(l) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to special rules for
 health insurance costs of self-employed individuals) is amended by striking
 `25 percent of'.
 (b) REPEAL OF SUNSET OF DEDUCTION- Subsection (l) of section 162 of such
 Code is amended by striking paragraph (6).
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- (1) The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply
 to amounts paid or incurred on or after January 1 of the 2nd year beginning
 after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) The amendment made by subsection (b) shall apply to taxable years
 beginning after December 31, 1990.
PART 2--INSURANCE REFORM
Subpart A--General Reforms
SEC. 171. GENERAL REFORMS.
 The Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 201 et seq.) is amended--
 (1) in sections 406(a)(2), 465(f), 480(a)(2), 485(a)(2), 497, and 505(a)(2),
 by striking `2701' and inserting `2801',
 (2) in section 926(b), by striking `2711' and inserting `2811',
 (3) by redesignating title XXVII as title XXVIII,
 (4) by redesignating sections 2701 through 2714 as sections 2801 through
 2814, respectively, and
 (5) by inserting after title XXVI the following new title:
`TITLE XXVII--GROUP HEALTH INSURANCE STANDARDS
`Part 1--General Standards; Definitions
`SEC. 2701. APPLICATION OF REQUIREMENTS TO EMPLOYMENT-RELATED HEALTH PLANS.
 `(a) INSURED PLANS-
 `(1) PLAN UNDER STATE REGULATORY PROGRAM OR CERTIFIED BY THE USHEALTH BOARD-
 No insured employment-related health plan may be issued in a State on or
 after the effective date specified in subsection (d) (and no new contract
 may be offered under such plan with respect to any employer beginning on
 or after such effective date) unless--
 `(A) the USHealth Board determines that the State has established a
 regulatory program that provides for the application and enforcement of
 the applicable standards established under section 2702 (to carry out the
 requirements of this title) and that meets the requirements of section
 2702(b) by such effective date, or
 `(B) if the State has not established such a program, the plan has been
 certified by the USHealth Board (in accordance with such procedures as the
 Board establishes) as meeting the applicable standards established under
 section 2702 by such effective date.
 `(2) PLAN DISAPPROVED UNDER LOOK-BEHIND AUTHORITY- If the USHealth Board
 determines, under section 2702(c), that an employment-related health
 plan does not meet the applicable requirements of this title on or after
 such effective date, regardless of whether or not the State has taken any
 action with respect to such noncompliance, no new contracts may be offered
 to employers under the plan on or after the date of the determination.
 `(b) SELF-INSURED PLANS-
 `(1) NEW PLANS- No self-insured employment-related health plan may be
 offered on or after the effective date specified in subsection (d) unless
 the plan has been certified by the USHealth Board (in accordance with such
 procedures as the Board establishes) as meeting the applicable standards
 established under section 2702 by such effective date.
 `(2) PLAN DISAPPROVED UNDER LOOK-BEHIND AUTHORITY- If the USHealth Board
 determines that a self-insured employment-related health plan does not meet
 the applicable requirements of this title on or after such effective date,
 no coverage may be provided under the plan to individuals not enrolled
 as of the date of the determination and the plan may not be continued for
 plan years beginning after the date of such determination until the Board
 determines that such plan is in compliance with such requirements.
 `(c) SANCTIONS-
 `(1) USE OF CEASE AND DESIST ORDER PROCESS- Except as provided in this
 subsection, the provisions of section 2108 of the Social Security Act shall
 apply to violations by plans of subsection (a) or (b) in the same manner
 as such provisions apply to violations by employers of the requirements
 of part A of title XXI of such Act.
 `(2) AMOUNT OF CIVIL MONEY PENALTY- The amount of any civil money penalty
 imposed under paragraph (1) shall not exceed $25,000 for each employer
 with respect to which a violation occurs. Such amount may take into account
 the penalties imposed by a State with respect to the same such violation.
 `(3) NOTICE TO EMPLOYER IN THE CASE OF INSURED PLANS- As part of any order
 issued under paragraph (1) in the case of an insured employment-related
 health plan, the order shall require notice to be provided, to each employer
 which meets the requirement of section 2101 of the Social Security Act
 through coverage under the plan, of the findings in the order.
 `(4) LOSS OF STATUS AS QUALIFIED EMPLOYER HEALTH PLAN-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- If an employment-related health plan is determined to be
 in violation of subsection (a) or (b) and is not determined to have come
 into compliance with the applicable standards within 6 months after the
 date of the initial determination of such a violation, the plan shall no
 longer be treated as a qualified employer health plan under title XVIII
 or XXI of the Social Security Act as of the end of such 6-month period.
 `(B) NO ENFORCEMENT OF INSURANCE CONTRACTS- In the case of an employer
 that is required, under part A of title XXI of the Social Security Act,
 to provide enrollment under a qualified employer health plan and that
 meets such requirement through an insured plan that is determined to be
 in violation of subsection (a)--
 `(i) if such plan is not brought into compliance within 30 days after the
 date of the violation, the employer may terminate by notice the contract
 with the plan and is not liable for payment of any additional amounts
 under the plan, and
 `(ii) if such plan no longer qualifies as a qualified employer health
 plan, such contract shall be terminated and the employer is not liable for
 payment of any amounts for periods in which the plan no longer qualifies
 as a qualified employer health plan.
 `(5) LOSS OF STATUS AS USHEALTH PROGRAM CARRIER- If the USHealth Board
 finds that an entity has issued or provided new coverage under an
 employment-related health plan in violation of subsection (a), the plan
 shall be disqualified from being eligible to be a carrier for purposes of
 part A of title XVIII of the Social Security Act for a period of 5 years
 beginning with contract years beginning after the date of the finding.
 `(d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The effective date specified in this subsection is
 January 1 of the 2nd year that begins after the date of the enactment of
 this title.
`SEC. 2702. ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS.
 `(a) ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS-
 `(1) NAIC- The USHealth Board shall request the NAIC--
 `(A) to develop specific standards, in the form of a model Act and model
 regulations, to implement the requirements of this title, and
 `(B) to report to the Board on such development,
by not later than October 1 of the year following the year in which this
title is enacted. If the NAIC develops such standards within such period and
the Board finds that such standards implement the requirements of this title,
such standards shall be the standards applied under section 2701.
 `(2) USHEALTH BOARD- If the NAIC fails to develop and report on such
 standards by such date or the USHealth Board finds that such standards do
 not implement the requirements of this title, the Board shall develop and
 publish, by not later than November 15 of the year following the year in
 which this title is enacted, such standards. Such standards shall then be
 the standards applied under section 2701.
 `(b) ADDITIONAL ELEMENTS OF REGULATORY PROGRAMS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A State regulatory program shall include the following:
 `(A) The enforcement under the program--
 `(i) shall be designed in a manner so as to secure compliance with the
 standards within 30 days after the date of a finding of noncompliance with
 such standards, and
 `(ii) shall provide for notice to the USHealth Board in cases where such
 compliance is not secured within such 30-day period.
 `(B) There shall be a toll-free telephone information and complaint system
 which provides for--
 `(i) the receipt and disposition of consumer complaints or inquiries
 regarding compliance of health plans with the requirements of this title, and
 `(ii) information to employers about carriers that offer employer health
 plans in the area covered by the regulatory authority.
Under clause (i), consumer complaints shall be recorded in accordance with a
uniform methodology developed by the NAIC and recognized by the USHealth Board.
 `(2) FEDERAL AUTHORITY- In the case of a State without a regulatory program
 approved under subsection (a), the USHealth Board shall provide for the
 establishment of the toll-free telephone information and complaint system
 described in paragraph (1)(B).
 `(c) USHEALTH BOARD REVIEW-
 `(1) PERIODIC REVIEW OF STATE REGULATORY PROGRAMS- The USHealth Board
 periodically shall review State regulatory programs to determine if
 they continue to meet the standards referred to in subsection (a) and
 the requirements of subsection (b). If the Board finds that a State
 regulatory program no longer meets such standards and requirements,
 before making a final determination, the Board shall provide the State
 an opportunity to adopt such a plan of correction as would permit the
 program to continue to meet such standards and requirements. If the Board
 makes a final determination that the State regulatory program, after such
 an opportunity, fails to meet such standards and requirements, the Board
 shall assume responsibility under section 2701(a)(1)(B) with respect to
 plans in the State.
 `(2) LOOK-BEHIND AUTHORITY- In the case of a State with a regulatory program
 found by the USHealth Board to meet the standards and requirements under
 this title, the Board nonetheless is authorized to determine whether or
 not individual insured employment-related health plans in the State have
 failed to comply with the applicable requirements of this title.
 `(d) APPLICATION TO ERISA- The USHealth Board shall consult with the
 Secretary of Labor concerning the application of the requirements of
 this part to employee welfare benefit plans under title I of the Employee
 Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.
`SEC. 2703. DEFINITIONS.
 `(a) HEALTH PLAN AND OTHER DEFINITIONS RELATING TO HEALTH PLANS- In
 this title:
 `(1) HEALTH PLAN-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `health plan' means--
 `(i) a group health plan (as defined in section 605 of the Employee
 Retirement Income Security Act of 1974), and
 `(ii) any other health insurance arrangement, including any arrangement
 (other than a group health plan) consisting of a hospital or medical expense
 incurred policy or certificate, hospital or medical service plan contract,
 health maintenance organization subscriber contract, or employment-related
 reinsurance plan (as defined in paragraph (3)).
 `(B) EXCLUSIONS-
 `(i) CERTAIN TYPES OF INSURANCE- Such term does not include--
 `(I) accident-only, credit, or disability income insurance,
 `(II) coverage issued as a supplement to liability insurance,
 `(III) worker's compensation or similar insurance, or
 `(IV) automobile medical-payment insurance.
 `(ii) USHEALTH PROGRAM- Such term does not include the USHealth Program
 under title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
 `(2) EMPLOYMENT-RELATED HEALTH PLAN- The term `employment-related health
 plan' means any employee welfare benefit plan (as defined in section 3(1) of
 the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974) that is a health plan.
 `(3) EMPLOYMENT-RELATED REINSURANCE PLAN- The term `employment-related
 reinsurance plan' means any reinsurance or similar mechanism that
 underwrites a portion of the risk for an employment-related health plan,
 if the mechanism is offered directly to a plan sponsor.
 `(4) INSURED EMPLOYMENT-RELATED HEALTH PLAN- The term `insured
 employment-related health plan' means an employment-related health plan that
 is not a self-insured employment-related health plan or an employment-related
 reinsurance plan.
 `(5) NETWORK PLAN- The term `network plan' has the meaning given such term
 in section 2731(a).
 `(6) SELF-INSURED EMPLOYMENT-RELATED HEALTH PLAN- The term `self-insured
 employment-related health plan' means an employment-related health plan in
 which the employer or employment-related group assumes the underwriting
 risk for the plan (whether or not there is any reinsurance or similar
 mechanism to underwrite a portion of that risk).
 `(b) CARRIER; HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATION; AND OTHER DEFINITIONS
 RELATING TO CARRIERS- In this part:
 `(1) CARRIER- The term `carrier' means any person that offers a health plan,
 whether through insurance or otherwise, including a licensed insurance
 company, a prepaid hospital or medical service plan, a health maintenance
 organization, a self-insurer carrier, a reinsurance carrier, and a multiple
 employer welfare arrangement.
 `(2) HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATION- The term `health maintenance
 organization' has the meaning given the term `eligible organization'
 in section 1876(b) of the Social Security Act .
 `(3) REINSURANCE CARRIER- The term `reinsurance carrier' means the entity
 assuming responsibility for underwriting under an employment-related
 reinsurance plan, but does not include a carrier insofar as it directly
 offers a health plan.
 `(4) SELF-INSURER CARRIER- The term `self-insurer carrier' means a carrier
 that is not a licensed insurance company, a prepaid hospital or medical
 service plan, or a health maintenance organization, that offers a health
 plan directly with respect to an employment-related group.
 `(c) GENERAL DEFINITIONS- In this part:
 `(1) APPLICABLE REGULATORY AUTHORITY- The term `applicable regulatory
 authority' means, with respect to a health plan offered in a State, the
 State commissioner or superintendent of insurance or other State authority
 responsible for regulation of health insurance, or, if the USHealth Board
 is exercising authority under section 2701(a)(1)(B) in the State, the Board.
 `(2) COMMUNITY- The term `community' has the meaning given such term in
 section 1820(e) of the Social Security Act.
 `(3) FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE- The term `full-time employee' has the meaning
 given such term in section 2181(b)(1) of the Social Security Act.
 `(4) NAIC- The term `NAIC' means the National Association of Insurance
 Commissioners.
 `(5) REFERENCE PREMIUM RATE- The term `reference premium rate' means, for
 a rating period in a community, the lowest premium rate charged or which
 could have been charged by the carrier to employers under a rating system
 in the community for health plans with the same or similar coverage. The
 reference premium rate is determined without regard to any adjustment
 effected under section 2712(d).
 `(6) STATE- The term `State' includes the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico,
 the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Northern Mariana Islands.
`Part 2--Employer Health Insurance Reforms
`SEC. 2710. NO DISCRIMINATION BASED ON HEALTH STATUS OR PRE-EXISTING
CONDITIONS.
 `(a) NO DISCRIMINATION BASED ON HEALTH STATUS FOR CERTAIN SERVICES- Except
 as provided under subsection (b), an employment-related health plan may
 not deny, limit, or condition the coverage under (or benefits of) the
 plan with respect to required health services based on the health status,
 claims experience, receipt of health care, medical history, or lack of
 evidence of insurability, of an individual.
 `(b) TREATMENT OF PRE-EXISTING CONDITION EXCLUSIONS FOR ALL SERVICES-
 The provisions of section 2154(b) of the Social Security Act (relating
 to treatment of pre-existing condition exclusion) shall apply to
 employer-related health plans under this section in the same manner as
 they apply to qualified health plans under that section.
`SEC. 2711. ENROLLMENT PRACTICE AND GUARANTEED RENEWABILITY REQUIREMENTS
FOR EMPLOYER HEALTH PLANS.
 `(a) REGISTRATION WITH APPLICABLE REGULATORY AUTHORITY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each carrier (as defined in section 2703(b)(1)) shall
 register with the applicable regulatory authority for each State in which
 it issues or offers an employer health plan.
 `(2) NO PREEMPTION OF STATE INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS- Nothing in paragraph
 (1) shall be construed as preventing the applicable regulatory authority
 from requiring, in the case of carriers that are not self-insurance
 carriers, such additional information in conjunction with, or apart from,
 the registration required under paragraph (1) as the applicable regulatory
 authority may be authorized to require under State law.
 `(b) GUARANTEED ISSUE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this subsection, a
 carrier that offers a health plan (including a reinsurance plan, but only
 if offered to a self-insured employment-related health plan) to employers
 located in a community must offer the same plan to any other employer
 located in the community.
 `(2) TREATMENT OF HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS-
 `(A) GEOGRAPHIC LIMITATIONS- A health maintenance organization may deny
 enrollment to employees (and family members) of an employer if the employees
 are located outside the service area of the organization, but only if such
 denial is applied uniformly without regard to health status or insurability.
 `(B) SIZE LIMITS- A health maintenance organization may apply to the
 applicable regulatory authority to cease enrolling new employer groups in
 its employer health plan (or in a geographic area served by the plan) if--
 `(i) it ceases to enroll any new employer groups, and
 `(ii) it can demonstrate that its financial or administrative capacity
 to serve previously enrolled groups and individuals (and additional
 individuals who will be expected to enroll because of affiliation with
 such previously enrolled groups) will be impaired if it is required to
 enroll new employer groups.
 `(3) GROUNDS FOR REFUSAL TO ISSUE OR RENEW-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- A carrier may refuse to issue or renew or terminate a
 plan only for--
 `(i) nonpayment of premiums,
 `(ii) fraud or misrepresentation, and
 `(iii) failure to meet minimum participation rates (consistent with
 subparagraph (B)).
 `(B) MINIMUM PARTICIPATION RATES- A carrier may require, with respect to
 an employer health plan, that a minimum percentage of full-time employees
 (who are not seasonal or temporary employees) eligible to enroll under
 the plan be enrolled, so long as such percentage is enforced uniformly
 for all employment groups of comparable size.
 `(c) MINIMUM PLAN PERIOD- A carrier may not offer to, or issue with respect
 to, an employer health plan with a term of less than 12 months.
 `(d) GUARANTEED RENEWABILITY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this subsection,
 each employer health plan must be renewed, at the option of the plan sponsor
 (as defined in section 3(16)(B) of the Employee Retirement Income Security
 Act of 1974), unless the plan is terminated for the reasons specified in
 subsection (a)(3)(A).
 `(2) NOTICE AND SPECIFICATION OF RATES AND ADMINISTRATIVE CHANGES-
 `(A) NOTICE- The carrier of an employer health plan shall provide for
 notice, at least 30 days before the date of expiration of the health plan,
 of the terms for renewal of the plan. Except with respect to rates and
 administrative changes, the terms of renewal (including benefits) shall
 be the same as the terms of issuance.
 `(B) RENEWAL RATES SAME AS ISSUANCE RATES- The carrier may change the
 terms for such renewal, but the premium rates charged with respect to such
 renewal shall be the same as that for a new issue.
 `(C) RATES CANNOT CHANGE MORE OFTEN THAN MONTHLY-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- A carrier may not change the premium rates established
 for an employer health plan more often than monthly.
 `(ii) APPLICATION OF NEW RATES- In the case of a plan issued which becomes
 effective in a month, the premium rates established under clause (i) for
 that month shall apply to all months during the 12-month period beginning
 with that month. In the case of a plan renewal which is effective for a
 12-month period beginning with a month, the premium rates established
 under clause (i) with respect to that month shall apply to all months
 during 12-month renewal period.
 `(3) PERIOD OF RENEWAL- The period of renewal of each employer health plan
 shall be for a period of not less than 12 months.
 `(e) EXCEPTION FOR SELF-INSURED CARRIERS- The requirements of this section
 (other than subsection (a)) shall not apply to self-insured carriers and
 self-insured employment-related health plans, but does apply to reinsurance
 carriers and employment-related reinsurance plans offered to such carriers
 or underwriting such self-insured plans.
`SEC. 2712. RATING PRACTICES FOR EMPLOYER HEALTH PLANS.
 `(a) COHESIVE RATING SYSTEM AND ACTUARIAL CERTIFICATION-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The premiums (including reference premium rate, as defined
 in section 2703(c)(5) and adjustments under subsection (d)) for all employer
 health plans of the same entity shall--
 `(A) be established based on a single cohesive rating system which is
 applied consistently for all employer groups and is designed not to treat
 groups, after the second effective year (as defined in subsection (f)),
 differently based on health status or risk status; and
 `(B) be actuarially certified annually.
 `(2) ACTUARIAL CERTIFIED DEFINED- For purposes of paragraph (1)(B), a plan is
 considered to be `actuarially certified' if there is a written statement, by
 a member of the American Academy of Actuaries or other individual acceptable
 to the applicable regulatory authority that a carrier is in compliance with
 this section, based upon the individual's examination, including a review of
 the appropriate records and of the actuarial assumptions and methods utilized
 by the carrier in establishing premium rates for applicable health plans.
 `(b) USE OF COMMUNITY-RATING- The reference premium rate charged for an
 employer health plan with similar benefits in a community for a type of
 family enrollment (described in subsection (e)) shall be the same for
 all employers.
 `(c) NO AGE AND SEX ADJUSTMENT TO COMMUNITY-RATING- An employer health plan
 may not provide for an adjustment to the reference premium rate based on
 age and gender of covered individuals.
 `(d) ADJUSTMENT IN RATES PERMITTED IN CASE OF USHEALTH PROGRAM REIMBURSEMENT
 ELECTION- An employer health plan may compute premiums based upon a
 percentage of the reference premium rate otherwise applicable if the plan
 sponsor to which the plan is being offered makes the reimbursement election
 described in section 2123 of the Social Security Act. Any such adjustment
 shall be applied consistently to all employers.
 `(e) TYPES OF FAMILY ENROLLMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each employer health plan shall permit enrollment of
 (and shall compute premiums separately for) individuals based on each of
 the following beneficiary classes:
 `(A) 1 adult.
 `(B) A married couple without children.
 `(C) 1 adult and 1 child.
 `(D) A married couple with 1 or more children, or 1 adult with 2 or more
 children.
 `(2) APPLICATION OF DEFINITIONS- The definitions in section 2181 of the
 Social Security Act shall apply for purposes of this subsection.
 `(f) EFFECTIVE YEARS DEFINED- In this section, the terms `first effective
 year' and `second effective year' mean the second and third years beginning
 after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 `(g) EXCEPTION FOR SELF-INSURED CARRIERS- The requirements of this section
 shall not apply to self-insured carriers and self-insured employment-related
 health plans, but does apply to reinsurance carriers and employment-related
 reinsurance plans offered to such carriers or underwriting such self-insured
 plans.
`SEC. 2713. BASIC BENEFIT PACKAGE FOR EMPLOYER HEALTH PLANS.
 `(a) IN GENERAL-
 `(1) BENEFITS AND COST-SHARING IN QUALIFIED HEALTH PLANS- Except as provided
 in paragraph (2), no employer health plan may be issued to an employer by
 a carrier unless--
 `(A) the plan provides for benefits for all required health services
 (as defined in section 2181(e)(1) of the Social Security Act);
 `(B) the plan does not impose cost-sharing with respect to required health
 services in excess of the deductibles and coinsurance permitted under part
 A of title XVIII with respect to such services (not taking into account
 any low-income assistance under part C of such title); and
 `(C) the carrier makes available to the employer an employer health plan
 that, subject to paragraph (2)(C), only provides the benefits for required
 health services and the maximum cost-sharing consistent with subparagraphs
 (A) and (B).
 `(2) EXCEPTIONS-
 `(A) NO APPLICATION TO REINSURANCE PLANS- Paragraph (1) shall not apply
 to employment-related reinsurance plans.
 `(B) REQUIRED OFFERING DOES NOT APPLY TO SELF-INSURED PLANS AND HMO'S-
 Paragraph (1)(C) shall not apply to a self-insured plan or the plan of a
 health maintenance organization.
 `(C) ADDITIONAL, OPTIONAL MINIMUM SERVICES- In meeting the requirement
 of paragraph (1)(C), an employer health plan may include such additional
 items and services as the carrier can demonstrate to the satisfaction
 of the applicable regulatory authority that inclusion of such items
 and services will facilitate appropriate hospital discharges or avoid
 unnecessary hospitalization.
 `(b) MANAGED CARE OPTION- If a carrier (other than a health maintenance
 organization or reinsurance carrier) offers to employers, that are not
 employers, in a community a qualified employer health plan that is a
 network plan or that includes a utilization review program, or both, the
 carrier must make available in the community an employer health plan that
 is such a network plan or that includes such a utilization review program,
 or both, respectively.
 `(c) EXCEPTION FOR REINSURANCE CARRIERS AND PLANS- The requirements of
 this section shall not apply to reinsurance carriers and employment-related
 reinsurance plans.
`SEC. 2714. MISCELLANEOUS DISCLOSURE AND RECORD-KEEPING REQUIREMENTS FOR
EMPLOYER HEALTH PLANS.
 `(a) DISCLOSURE TO EMPLOYERS-
 `(1) GENERAL DISCLOSURE- Each carrier shall disclose to each employer
 before issuing an employer health plan the following:
 `(A) The availability (pursuant to the requirement of section 2713(a)(1)(C))
 of a plan including only basic benefits.
 `(B) Whether any plan that is a network plan or provides for a utilization
 review program, or both, is available, as required under section 2713(b).
 `(C) The option of electing the reimbursement rules, as required under
 section 2123 of the Social Security Act.
 `(D) The limits, imposed under section 2712, on the premiums permitted to
 be charged for such plans.
 `(E) The rights of guaranteed issue and renewability provided under
 section 2711.
Such disclosure shall be in addition to any disclosure required generally
of qualified health plans under section 2158(a) of the Social Security Act.
 `(2) SPECIFIC DISCLOSURE UPON REQUEST- Each carrier shall disclose to each
 employer, upon request, information concerning the applicable premiums
 for employer health plans.
 `(3) STANDARD FORMAT- The disclosure under paragraph (1) shall be made
 in a uniform format established by the USHealth Board, after consultation
 with the NAIC.
 `(4) EXCEPTIONS- Paragraph (1) (other than subparagraphs (D) and (E))
 shall not apply to an employer reinsurance carrier with respect to an
 employment-related reinsurance plan.
 `(b) INFORMATION FILED WITH APPLICABLE REGULATORY AUTHORITY-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each carrier shall disclose to the applicable regulatory
 authority, in a manner specified by the USHealth Board, information
 concerning applicable premiums for employer health plans.
 `(2) ADDITIONAL INFORMATION- Nothing in this subsection shall be construed
 as limiting the information which an applicable regulatory authority may
 require to be reported by carriers (other than self-insured carriers).'.
Subpart B--Encouraging Establishment of Managed Care
SEC. 181. FAVORABLE TREATMENT OF NETWORK PLANS AND UTILIZATION REVIEW PROGRAMS.
 Title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act is further amended by adding
 at the end the following new part:
`Part 3--Favorable Treatment of Network Plans and Utilization Review Programs
`SEC. 2731. FAVORABLE TREATMENT OF NETWORK PLANS.
 `(a) NETWORK PLAN DEFINED- In this section, the term `network plan' means
 a qualified health plan--
 `(1) which (A) limits coverage of required health services to those provided
 by participating providers or (B) permits deductibles and coinsurance with
 respect to such services provided by persons who are not participating
 providers which are in excess of those permitted under qualified health
 plans under part C of title XXI of the Social Security Act;
 `(2) has a sufficient number and distribution of participating providers to
 assure that all required health services are (A) available and accessible to
 each enrollee, within the area served by the plan, with reasonable promptness
 and in a manner which assures continuity, and (B) when medically necessary,
 available and accessible twenty-four hours a day and seven days a week;
 `(3) provides benefits for required health services not furnished
 by participating providers if the services are medically necessary
 and immediately required because of an unforeseen illness, injury, or
 condition; and
 `(4) in which the carrier has organizational arrangements, established in
 accordance with regulations of the USHealth Board, for an ongoing quality
 assurance program for its health services, which program (A) stresses
 health outcomes, and (B) provides review by physicians and other health
 professionals of the process followed in the provision of health services.
 `(b) CONDITION OF STATE FUNDING-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- No amounts shall be made available under title IV, V, XIX,
 or XX of the Social Security Act to a State in any fiscal year (beginning
 with the first fiscal year beginning after the date of the enactment of
 this section) unless the State is in compliance with subsection (c).
 `(2) DEEMED ELECTION; IMPLIED PREEMPTION-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- A State is deemed to have elected subsection (c) to be in
 effect in the State as of the beginning of a fiscal year, unless the chief
 executive officer of a State indicates in writing that the State will not
 comply with such subsection. Such an election shall have the effect of
 preempting the establishment or enforcement of any State law that is in
 violation of subsection (c).
 `(B) CHANGES- A State is deemed not to have such an election in effect as
 of the date the USHealth Board determines that the State is enforcing any
 law or regulation in violation of subsection (c).
 `(c) LIMITATION ON RESTRICTIONS ON NETWORK PLANS- In order to comply with
 the requirements of this subsection--
 `(1) A State may not by law or regulation prohibit or unreasonably limit
 a network plan from including incentives for enrollees to use the services
 of participating providers.
 `(2) A State may not by law or regulation prohibit or unreasonably limit
 a network plan from limiting coverage of services to those provided by a
 participating provider.
 `(3)(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), a State may not by law or regulation
 prohibit or unreasonably limit the negotiation of rates and forms of
 payments for providers under a network plan.
 `(B) Subparagraph (A) shall not apply where the amount of payments with
 respect to a category of services or providers is established under a
 Statewide system applicable to all non-Federal payors with respect to such
 services or providers.
 `(4) A State may not by law or regulation prohibit or unreasonably limit
 a network plan from limiting the number of participating providers.
 `(5) A State may not by law or regulation prohibit or unreasonably limit
 a network plan from requiring that services be provided (or authorized) by
 a primary care physician selected by the enrollee from a list of available
 participating providers.
 `(d) PARTICIPATING PROVIDER DEFINED- In this section, the term `participating
 provider' means an entity or individual which provides, sells, or leases
 health care services under a contract with a network plan, which contract
 does not permit--
 `(1) cost-sharing in excess of the cost-sharing permitted under a qualified
 health plan under part C of title XXI of the Social Security Act with
 respect to required health services, and
 `(2) any enrollee charges (for such services covered under the plan)
 in excess of such cost-sharing.
`SEC. 2732. FAVORABLE TREATMENT OF UTILIZATION REVIEW PROGRAMS.
 `(a) PREEMPTION OF STATE LAWS RESTRICTING UTILIZATION REVIEW PROGRAMS THAT
 MEET FEDERAL STANDARDS-
 `(1) CERTIFICATION PROCESS- The USHealth Board shall establish a process
 whereby health plans that include utilization review programs (as defined
 in subsection (c)) may apply to the Board for a certification that the
 programs meet the standards established under subsection (b). The Board may
 not provide for such a certification unless the program meets such standards.
 `(2) RESULTS OF CERTIFICATION- In the case of a utilization review program
 certified under paragraph (1), no State law or regulation shall prohibit
 or regulate activities under such program, except insofar as such law or
 regulation is consistent with the standards established under paragraph (1).
 `(b) ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDARDS FOR UTILIZATION REVIEW PROGRAMS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The USHealth Board shall provide, by regulation, for
 the establishment of Federal standards for utilization review programs
 of qualified health plans and of employment-related health plans. Such
 standards shall be designed to assure, within a plan, the cost-effective
 and medically appropriate use of services.
 `(2) CONTENTS OF STANDARDS- Such standards shall be established with respect
 to at least each of the following aspects of utilization review programs:
 `(A) The qualification of those who may perform utilization review
 activities.
 `(B) The standards to be applied in performing utilization review.
 `(C) The timeliness in which utilization review determinations are to
 be made.
 `(D) An appeals process which provides a fair opportunity for individuals
 adversely affected by a utilization review determination to have such a
 determination reviewed.
 `(E) Protection for the confidentiality of individually-identifiable
 information used in the process.
 `(3) USE OF GUIDELINES- Such standards shall, to the maximum extent feasible,
 be consistent with practice guidelines developed by the Agency for Health
 Care Policy and Research.
 `(4) EXPERIENCE WITH PEER REVIEW ORGANIZATIONS- In the development of the
 standards, the Board shall consider the experience obtained in the peer
 review program under part B of title XI of the Social Security Act and in
 the activities of fiscal intermediaries and carriers under title XVIII of
 such Act.
 `(5) DEADLINE- Standards shall first be established under this subsection
 by not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this title. The
 Board may revise the standards from time to time as required to assure,
 within health plans, the cost-effective and medically appropriate use
 of services.
 `(c) UTILIZATION REVIEW PROGRAM DEFINED- In this section, the term
 `utilization review program' means a system of reviewing the medical
 necessity and appropriateness of patient services (which may include
 inpatient and outpatient services) using specified guidelines. Such a
 system may include preadmission certification, the application of practice
 guidelines, continued stay review, discharge planning, preauthorization
 of ambulatory procedures, and retrospective review.'.
Subpart C--Repeal of COBRA Continuation Requirements
SEC. 191. REPEAL OF COBRA CONTINUATION REQUIREMENTS.
 (a) UNDER PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT- Title XXII of the Public Health
 Service Act is repealed.
 (b) Under Internal Revenue Code-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 4980B of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is
 repealed.
 (2) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- Section 414 of such Code is amended--
 (A) in subsection (n)(3)(C), by striking `505, and 4980B' and inserting
 `and 505', and
 (B) in subsection (t)(2), by striking `505, or 4980B' and inserting `or 505'.
 (c) UNDER EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT INCOME SECURITY ACT OF 1974-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Part 6 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement
 Income Security Act of 1974 is repealed.
 (2) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 502(c)(1) of such Act (29
 U.S.C. 1132(c)(1)) is amended by striking `paragraph (1) or (4) of section
 606 or'.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The repeals effected by subsections (a), (b), and (c)
 shall apply to--
 (A) health plans with respect to employees of large employers as of January
 1 of the 2nd year beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act,
 (B) health plans with respect to employees of medium-size employers as
 of January 1 of the 3rd year beginning after the date of the enactment of
 this Act, and
 (C) health plans with respect to employees of small employers as of January
 1 of the 4th year beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) DEFINITIONS- The terms `large employer', `medium-size employer', and
 `small employer' have the meanings given such terms in 2181(c) of the
 Social Security Act.
 (e) NOTICE OF BENEFITS UNDER PUBLIC HEALTH INSURANCE PLAN- In the case of
 continuation coverage which is in effect on the date of a repeal under this
 section but which is to be discontinued after such date (and before the
 date required under the law in effect before the date of the enactment of
 this Act) such continuation may not be discontinued without 30-days notice
 to the individual of such discontinuation. Such notice shall include such
 information respecting continuation of coverage through enrollment under
 the USHealth Program as the USHealth Board shall specify.
TITLE II--PROVISION OF LONG-TERM HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED CARE, NURSING HOME
CARE, AND OTHER BENEFITS FOR ALL AMERICANS THROUGH THE USHEALTH PROGRAM
SEC. 201. LONG-TERM CARE PROTECTION AND CERTAIN PREVENTIVE BENEFITS.
 Title XVIII of the Social Security Act, as amended by other provisions in
 this Act, is amended by inserting after part A the following new part B:
`Part B--Long-Term Care Protection and Certain Preventive Benefits
`Subpart 1--Long-Term Care Protection
`ELIGIBILITY
 `SEC. 1831. (a) IN GENERAL- Subject to the succeeding provisions of this
 part, an individual described in section 1806(a)(2) shall be eligible for
 benefits under this subpart if--
 `(1) the individual has been determined by a Screening Agency through a
 screening process (conducted in accordance with section 1833) to be--
 `(A)(i) completely dependent with respect to at least one age-appropriate
 activity of daily living or unable to perform two or more age-appropriate
 activities of daily living without human assistance or supervision,
 including verbal reminding or physical cueing; or
 `(ii) so cognitively impaired (due to adult onset, acquired chronic organic
 disease of the brain occurring in clear consciousness, and including those
 individuals who would meet such criteria except for the presence of a
 transient delirium in such individuals) as to require ongoing supervision
 from another individual because such impaired individual engages in
 inappropriate behavior that pose a substantial health and safety hazard
 to such impaired individual or to others; and
 `(2) with respect to nursing home services, the Screening Agency has
 determined that providing nursing facility services in a nursing facility
 would be in the best interest of the individual.
 `(b) APPLICATION- An individual shall be eligible for benefits under this
 subpart only if--
 `(1) the individual has filed an application for, and is in need of,
 benefits covered under this subpart;
 `(2) the legal guardian of the individual has filed an application on behalf
 of an individual who is in need of benefits covered under this subpart; or
 `(3) the representative of an individual who is cognitively impaired,
 who has no legal guardian, and who is in need of benefits covered under
 this subpart, files an application on behalf of the individual.
 `(c) SCREENING TOOL AND PERIODIC EVALUATIONS- The Screening Agency shall,
 in the case of an individual who has received 6 months of nursing facility
 services under this subpart, continue to perform the same screening
 in order to determine the continued need of an individual for nursing
 facility services under this subpart. The Case Management Agency shall
 continue to make such an evaluation periodically, pursuant to regulations
 of the USHealth Board, as long as an individual remains in a nursing
 facility. Such a screening or evaluation may be waived in such cases as
 the USHealth Board determines to be unnecessary based on the nature of an
 individual's condition.
`LONG-TERM CARE BENEFITS
 `SEC. 1832. (a) An individual who meets the eligibility criteria prescribed
 in section 1831 shall be eligible under the program established by this
 subpart for coverage for the following (if furnished on or after January 1
 of the 2nd year beginning after the date of the enactment of the USHealth
 Program Act of 1991):
 `(1) HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES- Home and community-based care
 services that are--
 `(A) determined to be necessary by a Case Management Agency;
 `(B) described in the care plan of the individual;
 `(C) services for which the individual is eligible; and
 `(D) consistent with (i) the need for care of the individual, (ii)
 regulations issued by the USHealth Board, and (iii) standards established
 under this subpart.
 `(2) RESPITE CARE- Respite care (which may include home and community-based
 services or nursing facility services) if--
 `(A) the individual is dependent on a daily basis on a primary caregiver who
 is assisting the individual without monetary compensation in the performance
 of at least two age-appropriate activities of daily living; and
 `(B) without such assistance the individual could not perform such activities
 of daily living;
or the individual has dementia or other cognitive impairments, as determined
by a Screening Agency.
 `(3) NURSING FACILITY SERVICES- Nursing facility services provided to
 the individual by a nursing facility that are required by the individual,
 which may include--
 `(A) nursing care provided by or under the supervision of a registered
 professional nurse;
 `(B) bed and board in connection with the furnishing of nursing care;
 `(C) physical, occupational, or speech therapy and mental health services
 furnished by a facility or by others under arrangements with a facility;
 `(D) medical social services;
 `(E) drug, biological, supply, appliance, and equipment for use in the
 facility, that is ordinarily furnished by the facility for the care and
 treatment of an inpatient;
 `(F) medical services of an intern or resident-in-training under an
 approved teaching program of a hospital with which a facility has in effect
 a transfer agreement or other diagnostic or therapeutic service provided
 by a hospital with which a facility has in effect a transfer agreement; and
 `(G) such other health services necessary to the health of a patient as
 are generally provided by a nursing facility.
 `(b) DURATION- The duration of benefits covered under this subpart shall
 be unlimited as long as the Case Management Agency determines, through
 its periodic review of a patient, that the patient continues to require
 services covered under this subpart.
 `(c) REQUIREMENT OF NEED- The determination of the need of an individual for
 covered services shall be made by the Case Management Agency. An analysis
 of such need shall be included in the care plan of the individual.
 `(d) LIMITATIONS ON COVERAGE FOR RESPITE CARE- Coverage for respite care
 under this subpart shall be for short periods of time not to exceed 720
 hours during a given calendar year.
`LONG-TERM CARE AGENCIES
 `SEC. 1833. (a) Long-Term Care Screening Agency-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT- The USHealth Board shall contract with States, or in
 any case in which a State declines to contract with the Board, with other
 entities to act as Long-Term Care Screening Agencies (in this subpart
 referred to as the `Screening Agency') for the State (or each designated
 area of a State). It shall be the responsibility of such agency to assess
 the eligibility of individuals residing in the geographic jurisdiction
 of the agency, for services provided under this subpart according to the
 requirements of this subpart and regulations prescribed by the Board.
 `(2) ELIGIBILITY- The Screening Agency shall determine the eligibility of
 an individual based on the results of a preliminary telephone or written
 questionnaire (completed by the applicant, by the caregiver of the applicant,
 or by the legal guardian or representative of the applicant) that shall
 be validated through the use of a screening tool administered in person
 by a physician, nurse practitioner, or registered professional nurse, to
 each applicant determined eligible through initial telephone or written
 questionnaire interviews not later than 15 days from the date on which
 such individual initially applied for services under this subpart.
 `(3) QUESTIONNAIRES AND SCREENING TOOLS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The USHealth Board shall establish a telephone or written
 questionnaire and a screening tool to be used by the Screening Agency to
 determine the eligibility of an individual for services under this subpart
 consistent with requirements of this subpart and standards established by
 the Board by regulation.
 `(B) QUESTIONNAIRES- The questionnaire shall include questions about
 the functional impairment, mental status, and living arrangement of an
 individual and other criteria that the Board shall prescribe by regulation.
 `(C) SCREENING TOOLS- The screening tool should measure functional impairment
 caused by physical or cognitive conditions as well as information concerning
 cognition disability, behavioral problems (such as wandering or abusive and
 aggressive behavior), the living arrangement of an individual, availability
 of caregivers, and any other criteria that the Board shall prescribe by
 regulation. The screening tool shall be administered in person.
 `(4) NOTIFICATION- Not later than 15 days after the date on which an
 individual initially applied for services under this subpart (by phone or
 written questionnaire), the Screening Agency shall notify such individual
 that such individual is not eligible for benefits, or that such individuals
 must schedule an in-person screening to determine final eligibility
 for benefits under this subpart. The Screening Agency shall notify such
 individual of its final decision not later than 2 working days after the
 in-person screening.
 `(5) IN-PERSON SCREENING- An individual (or the legal guardian or
 representative of such individual) whose application for long-term care
 benefits under this subpart is denied on the basis of information provided
 through a telephone or written questionnaire, shall be notified of such
 individual's right to an in-person screening by a nurse or appropriate
 health care professionals.
 `(6) APPEALS- The USHealth Board shall establish a mechanism for hearings
 and appeals in cases in which individuals contest the eligibility findings
 of the Screening Agency.
 `(7) FUNDING LEVEL- The Screening Agency shall be responsible for determining
 the estimated funding level that shall be allotted for individuals eligible
 for home and community-based care, pursuant to standards established under
 section 1835(e) and regulations of the Board.
 `(b) LONG-TERM CARE CASE MANAGEMENT AGENCY-
 `(1) ESTABLISHMENT- The USHealth Board shall contract with a State or, in
 any case in which a State declines to contract with the Board, a private
 nonprofit organization, to establish and administer a Long-Term Care Case
 Management Agency (referred to in this subpart as a `Case Management Agency')
 for each designated area of a State. Such agency shall demonstrate expertise
 in the delivery of health and social services to the chronically ill and
 disabled pursuant to requirements established in this subpart and such
 standards as the Board may establish by regulation (including standards
 for training and qualification of personnel, financial responsibility,
 and governance).
 `(2) DUTIES- A Case Management Agency shall provide case management services
 for eligible individuals directly or through contracts with home care or
 home health agencies that meet the requirements of this subpart and standards
 prescribed by the Board by regulation for providing case management services.
 `(3) CARE PLAN- The Case Management Agency shall develop a care plan for each
 individual determined to be eligible by a Screening Agency. In developing a
 care plan for an individual, the Case Management Agency shall design a plan
 that meets the service needs of the individual, consistent with the resources
 available to the agency. Instead of developing such a plan, the Agency may
 approve such a plan which has been developed by a qualified service provider.
 `(4) Funding-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The actual level of funding allotted to an eligible
 individual by the Case Management Agency to cover services included in the
 individual's care plan may fall above or below the estimated annualized
 level allotted to the individual by the Screening Agency based on the
 detailed assessment and plan of care provided by the Case Management Agency.
 `(B) LIMITATION- The Case Management Agency shall allocate the resources
 available from the Screening Agency (as described in section 1835(a))
 to ensure that the total expenditures for home and community-based care
 for individuals eligible for services covered under this subpart residing
 within the geographic jurisdiction of the agency do not exceed the total
 amount available monthly to the Case Management Agency, pursuant to this
 section, for home and community-based services. The Case Management Agency
 shall establish specific financial controls (including authorizing the
 amount, scope, and duration of services to be provided to an individual)
 to carry out this subparagraph.
 `(c) REGISTRY- A Case Management Agency shall maintain a registry of
 qualified providers of home and community-based care and nursing facilities
 in the State and shall assist individuals in choosing qualified providers
 to carry out the care plan. An individual eligible for services under this
 subpart shall be free to choose from the registry the home care agency,
 home health agency, or other qualified provider of services to carry out
 the care plan of such individual. The Case Management Agency shall assist
 the individual in locating alternative providers if the individual becomes
 dissatisfied with the provider initially chosen.
 `(d) MONITORING- A State, in addition to the USHealth Board, shall monitor
 the performance of all designated Case Management Agencies and assure
 the fiscal stability of such agencies. A State shall act as the financial
 guarantor of each agency.
`QUALIFIED SERVICE PROVIDERS
 `SEC. 1834. (a) IN GENERAL- Services provided to eligible individuals
 pursuant to a plan of care under this subpart shall be provided by qualified
 service providers.
 `(b) QUALIFICATIONS FOR HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICE PROVIDERS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A qualified service provider of home and community-based
 services shall include--
 `(A) a home care agency certified by the State;
 `(B) a home health agency certified by the USHealth Board;
 `(C) an adult day care center certified by the State; and
 `(D) another certified or licensed provider of specific services, including
 a registered professional nurse, qualified social worker, physician,
 nurse practitioner, physical, occupational or speech therapist, certified
 dietitian, and other providers as the Board shall designate by regulation,
 that meets standards established by the Board.
 `(2) APPROVAL REQUIRED FOR REIMBURSEMENT- No individual or agency shall be
 eligible for reimbursement for home and community-based services provided
 to an individual under this subpart unless the Case Management Agency
 approves the provision of services to such individual or agency.
`PAYMENT FOR HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES
 `SEC. 1835. (a) CASE MANAGEMENT AGENCIES- The USHealth Board shall pay
 to each Case Management Agency monthly an amount that equals the sum of
 the amounts allotted by the Screening Agency for eligible individuals in
 the geographic jurisdiction of such Case Management Agency who have been
 determined by such Screening Agency to be eligible to receive services
 covered under this subpart with respect to home and community-based services.
 `(b) SERVICE PROVIDERS-
 `(1) DIRECT PAYMENTS- The Case Management Agency shall make direct payments
 to certified home care and home health agencies, and other qualified
 providers of home and community-based services reimbursable under this
 subpart, in accordance with such methods as the State may establish pursuant
 to regulations promulgated by the USHealth Board.
 `(2) FULL PAYMENT FOR SERVICES- All providers of home and community-based
 care services under the program established under this subpart shall accept
 payment rates established by the Case Management Agency as payment in full
 for services and shall not pass on additional charges to beneficiaries
 for services rendered under a plan of care.
 `(c) PROVIDERS OF CASE MANAGEMENT SERVICES- If a Case Management Agency
 contracts with a home health or home care agency to provide case management
 services, the Case Management Agency shall make direct payments to such
 organization in accordance with such methods as the State may establish
 pursuant to regulations promulgated by the USHealth Board.
 `(d) LIMIT ON PAYMENT FOR HOME HEALTH AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES-
 `(1) INITIAL PERIOD- During the 3-year period beginning with the 2nd
 year beginning after the date of the enactment of the USHealth Program
 Act of 1991, the maximum amount of payments that may be made to a Case
 Management Agency for home and community-based services provided to an
 individual who resides in the geographic jurisdiction of the agency and
 who is eligible for services under this subpart shall be, on an annualized
 basis, not more than 65 percent of the average amount payable, including
 the cost of ancillary services, for the same number of care days for care
 in a skilled nursing facility under this subpart in the area in which the
 home and community-based care is provided.
 `(2) SUBSEQUENT YEARS- In years subsequent to the period referred to in
 paragraph (1), the maximum amount referred to in such paragraph shall be
 established by the USHealth Board according to such prospective payment
 methods as the Board may establish by regulation to assure that no payment
 is made for home and community-based services that will exceed the cost of
 an alternative placement in a nursing facility, less a reasonable estimate
 of the cost of room and board in such facilities or in the community.
 `(e) AMOUNT OF COVERAGE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to subsection (d) and the succeeding provisions
 of this subsection, the amount of coverage allotted to an eligible
 individual shall be the amount necessary to carry out the service needs
 of the individual.
 `(2) MAXIMUM AVERAGE AMOUNT- In the case of an individual in a given
 geographic area, the average amount payable for such individual under this
 subpart for home and community-based services shall not exceed an amount
 determined by multiplying--
 `(A) the maximum amount prescribed in subsection (d), by
 `(B) a measure of the severity of the need for services of the individual.
 `(3) SEVERITY OF NEED FOR SERVICES- For purposes of paragraph (2)(B), the
 severity of the need for services of an individual shall be estimated by
 such statistical models and techniques, that shall include a measure of the
 severity of dependency in activities of daily living, cognitive impairment,
 living arrangement, age, and such other factors as the USHealth Board shall
 specify by regulation, except that all individuals determined to be eligible
 for services under this subpart shall be presumed to face a monthly need
 for services of at least 5 percent of the maximum allotment. In determining
 eligibility, the Board shall not use any measures of the income and assets
 of the individual. Expenditures authorized by this paragraph shall be made
 only for the home and community-based services specified in this subpart
 in accordance with a written care plan prepared through case management
 services provided by the Case Management Agency or a home care or home health
 agency under contract with the agency to provide case management services.
 `(f) ACCEPTANCE OF REFERRALS AND REIMBURSEMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), a home health or
 home care agency or other provider certified by a State to provide home
 and community-based services reimbursable under this subpart shall provide
 services to all individuals referred to the provider by a Case Management
 Agency or by an organization under contract with the agency to provide
 case management services and accept as payment in full the reimbursement
 amounts provided under this subpart.
 `(2) EXCEPTION- The service requirement imposed under paragraph (1)
 shall not apply if the requirement would be in conflict with the operating
 policies under which the provider was certified (such as the maximum number
 of individuals an agency may care for at any time).
 `(g) Miscellaneous Provisions-
 (1) ADDITIONAL SERVICES- Nothing contained in this subpart shall be construed
 to preclude any individual who is eligible to receive services under this
 subpart from purchasing home and community-based services that are more
 generous than services provided for in the care plan of the individual. If
 an individual purchases more generous services, a provider may not charge
 such individual higher rates for such services than the rates the provider
 is authorized to charge for services reimbursed under this subpart.
 `(2) RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ENTITLEMENT PROGRAMS- Notwithstanding any other
 provision of law, in the case of any service covered under this subpart that
 is also covered under another Federally administered entitlement program,
 the USHealth Board shall act as a secondary payer under this subpart.
 `(3) REIMBURSEMENT- Reimbursement for services provided under this subpart
 shall be subject to the requirements of this subpart and regulations
 prescribed by the USHealth Board.
 `(4) PAYMENT FOR RESPITE CARE- Reimbursement rates for respite care services
 covered under this subpart shall be the same as rates established in this
 subpart for home and community-based services and nursing facility services.
`PAYMENT FOR NURSING FACILITY SERVICES
 `SEC. 1836. (a) AMOUNT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Reimbursement for nursing facility services under this
 subpart shall be, subject to coinsurance specified in paragraph (2)
 and room and board charges specified in subsection (c), the amount the
 USHealth Board determines to be reasonable and appropriate to cover the
 cost of nursing facility services provided under this subpart, taking
 into account the average cost of providing appropriate care in the most
 efficient manner. Certified nursing facilities shall accept payment for
 services rendered under this subpart as payment in full and shall not be
 allowed to pass on additional charges to beneficiaries for covered services.
 `(2) COINSURANCE- Subject to section 1843, the reimbursement for--
 `(A) the first 180 days of nursing facility services furnished under this
 subpart to an individual during a spell of illness, shall not be reduced
 by any coinsurance amount, and
 `(B) any subsequent days of nursing facility services furnished under this
 subpart to an individual during a spell of illness shall be reduced by a
 room and board charge specified in subsection (c).
 `(b) PROSPECTIVE PAYMENT- To the extent feasible, the USHealth Board
 shall establish a prospective payment mechanism for payment for nursing
 facility services covered under this subpart that takes into account the
 expected resource utilization of individual patients based on the degree of
 impairment of the patients and other factors affecting service requirements.
 `(c) ROOM AND BOARD-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Payment for room and board under this subpart shall be made
 by an individual participating in the program established by this subpart for
 those days spent in a nursing facility beyond 200 days in a spell of illness.
 `(2) MANNER OF PAYMENT- Subject to part C (relating to low-income
 assistance), such payments for room and board shall be made by an individual
 directly to the nursing facility and shall be reduced by the amount of
 low-income assistance provided under part C.
 `(3) RATES-
 `(A) INITIAL PERIOD- During the 3-year period beginning with the 2nd year
 beginning after the date of the enactment of the USHealth Program Act
 of 1991, charges for room and board shall be 35 percent of the average
 per diem rate paid by the USHealth Board to nursing facilities receiving
 reimbursement under this subpart.
 `(B) SUBSEQUENT YEARS- In years subsequent to the period referred to in
 subparagraph (A), the charges for room and board shall be such percent, of
 the average per diem rate paid by the USHealth Board to nursing facilities
 receiving reimbursement under this subpart, as the Board determines reflects
 a reasonable estimate of the cost of room and board in such facilities.
`CERTIFICATION
 `SEC. 1837. (a) Requirement-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- A State shall--
 `(A) survey home care agencies, home health agencies, and adult day care
 centers to determine their eligibility to participate in the program
 established under this subpart; and
 `(B) certify such an agency or center as eligible to participate in such
 program if the agency meets the requirements of this subpart and regulations
 prescribed by the USHealth Board.
 `(2) FREQUENCY- A State shall conduct the survey and certification required
 under paragraph (1) not less than once during each fiscal year.
 `(b) INDIVIDUAL PROVIDERS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- To be eligible to be reimbursed for home and community-based
 services covered under this subpart, a qualified service provider referred
 to in section 1834(b) shall be licensed or, if applicable, certified by
 the State in which the provider practices pursuant to the requirements of
 this subpart and regulations prescribed by the USHealth Board.
 `(2) HOMEMAKERS AND HOME HEALTH AIDES- To be reimbursed for home and
 community-based services covered under this subpart, a homemaker or home
 health aide must be a trained employee of a certified home care or home
 health agency working under professional supervision.
 `(3) WAIVER- The USHealth Board may waive the certification requirement
 for providers that do not provide direct patient care.
`HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED CARE ADVISORY COUNCIL
 `SEC. 1838. (a) ESTABLISHMENT- No later than January 1st of the first
 year beginning after the date of enactment of this subpart, there shall be
 established an independent body to be known as the `Home and Community-Based
 Care Advisory Council' (referred to in this section as the `Council').
 `(b) Membership-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- The Council shall be composed of 13 individuals appointed
 by the USHealth Board.
 `(2) EXPERTISE- To the maximum extent practicable, the Council shall
 include individuals with expertise in pediatrics, geriatrics, gerontology,
 disability, case management of home and community-based services and
 home and community-based care reimbursement, home and community-based care
 consumers and their representatives, home and community-based care providers
 and their representatives, professionals with expertise in long-term care
 including nurses, social workers, discharge planners, third party payors,
 long-term care ombudsmen, and State and local health and social service
 agency representatives.
 `(3) TERM- An appointment to the Council shall be for a term of not to
 exceed 4 years.
 `(c) PURPOSE- The purpose of the Council shall be--
 `(1) to assist the USHealth Board in assuring the prompt and efficient
 implementation of this subpart,
 `(2) to regularly review the implementation of this subpart, and
 `(3) to recommend to the Board and Congress any necessary modifications
 of this subpart,
with respect to home and community-based services.
 `(d) CONSULTATION- The USHealth Board shall regularly and closely consult
 with the Council in the implementation and administration of this subpart.
 `(e) MEETINGS- To carry out this section, the USHealth Board shall meet with
 the Council at least once every month during the 24-month period beginning
 60 days after the date of enactment of this subpart and at least quarterly
 after such period.
`HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED CARE QUALITY ASSURANCE
 `SEC. 1839. (a) HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED PROVIDER QUALITY ASSURANCE
 REQUIREMENTS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In addition to such other requirements as may apply,
 the USHealth Board shall promulgate regulations that require that in
 order to receive funding under this subpart for the provision of home
 or community-based services (referred to in this section as `services'),
 all qualified providers shall, not later than 6 months after the date of
 the publication of such regulations--
 `(A) comply with the consumers' bill of rights promulgated under section
 1893;
 `(B)(i) implement procedures for promptly reviewing and resolving the
 grievances of consumers of services, and
 `(ii) provide an oral notification and a written copy of such procedures
 to each consumer (or the representative or guardian of the consumer)
 who receives services provided by a qualified provider;
 `(C) ensure that each provider employed by or under contract with a home
 care or home health agency receives training--
 `(i) sufficient to meet a level of proficiency established by the USHealth
 Board in regulations (in consultation with representatives of the elderly,
 disabled, and children, home health and home care agencies, and experts in
 the fields of geriatric nursing, pediatric nursing, geriatric social work,
 pediatric social work, mental health, rehabilitation, and other appropriate
 health care professionals) that are appropriate in content and amount as
 are consistent with the requirements of section 1891, including training
 in the care needs of the cognitively impaired, and
 `(ii) that is designed to develop separate levels of proficiency in and
 is reflective of the range of skills required of providers that provide
 different levels of services;
 `(D) make available on request to each consumer information on the amount
 of training or level of certification achieved by each provider employed
 by or under contract with a home care or home health agency;
 `(E) supervise all care providers employed by or under contract with
 a qualified provider in accordance with regulations promulgated by the
 USHealth Board (including regular random on-site supervisory visits by
 registered nurses or other appropriate health care professionals); and
 `(F) perform annual evaluations of the quality of services provided by
 providers employed by or under contract with a qualified provider that
 shall document consumer involvement through a process that shall include
 client interviews.
 `(2) DURABLE MEDICAL EQUIPMENT SERVICES- In addition to such other
 requirements as may apply, to receive funding for the provision of durable
 medical equipment services under this subpart, a qualified provider shall
 in each case of a consumer to which such services are provided--
 `(A) issue written instructions for the operation of such equipment;
 `(B) provide sufficient training to the consumer, the family of the
 consumer, and the staff to permit the appropriate and safe operation of
 all such equipment; and
 `(C) formulate an emergency plan that is appropriate for the services
 provided to the home care consumer.
 `(b) CASE MANAGEMENT AGENCY QUALITY ASSURANCE REQUIREMENTS- In addition to
 such other requirements as may apply, the USHealth Board shall promulgate
 regulations requiring that an agency, to receive funding for the provision
 of case management services under this subpart, shall, not later than 6
 months after the date of the publication of such regulations--
 `(1)(A) comply with the consumers' bill of rights promulgated under section
 1893; and
 `(B) provide an oral notification and a written copy of such bill of
 rights to each consumer (or the representative or guardian of the consumer)
 who receives services under this subpart;
 `(2)(A) implement procedures for the prompt review and resolution of the
 grievances of consumers, and
 `(B) provide an oral notification and a written copy of such procedures
 to each consumer (or the representative or guardian of such consumer)
 who receives services from the agency;
 `(3) provide to each consumer (or the representative or guardian of
 the consumer) a written statement of the services to be provided to the
 consumer and the schedule for the provision of such services, as agreed
 on by the consumer;
 `(4) provide to each consumer a clear written statement as to how the
 consumer (or the representative or guardian of the consumer), may appeal
 the benefit and level decisions made by the agency;
 `(5) maintain procedures that assure prompt access by eligible consumers
 to services;
 `(6) ensure that the personnel that provide case management services to
 each consumer have received adequate training as prescribed in regulations
 promulgated by the USHealth Board, in consultation with the appropriate
 Quality Assurance Board; and
 `(7) establish and implement case management procedures that shall include--
 `(A) a plan of care that establishes reasonable and measurable client
 objectives and the services to be provided to meet such objectives;
 `(B) a plan of care that employs outcome measures of care insofar as they
 are appropriate and available for each consumer served;
 `(C) methods for a review of--
 `(i) the needs of the consumer; and
 `(ii) the plan of care for the consumer;
 `(D) methods for follow-up and on-going monitoring of patient and services
 delivery; and
 `(E) a statement of the criteria and procedures to be applied for the
 discharge or transfer of the consumer to another agency, program, or service.
The review under subparagraph (C) shall be at least once during every 6-month
period, or such shorter period as may be appropriate in the case of changing
needs of the consumer or at the request of the consumer or caregiver.
 `(c) STANDARD AND EXTENDED SURVEY- Section 1891(c) and (d) shall apply to
 home health agencies certified to receive payments for services provided
 under this subpart.
 `(d) SURVEY- The USHealth Board shall develop and implement a standard
 and extended survey of home care agencies certified to receive payments
 for services provided under this subpart.
 `(d) REFERENCE TO ADDITIONAL QUALITY ASSURANCE PROVISIONS- For additional
 provisions relating to quality assurance under this subpart, see the
 amendments made by subtitle A of title V of the USHealth Program Act of 1991.
`DEFINITIONS
 `SEC. 1840. As used in this subpart:
 `(1) ACTIVITY OF DAILY LIVING- The term `activity of daily living' includes
 each of the following:
 `(A) BATHING- Getting water and cleansing the whole body, including turning
 on the water for a bath, shower, or sponge bath, getting to, in, and out
 of a tub or shower, and washing and drying oneself.
 `(B) DRESSING- Getting clothes from closets and drawers and then getting
 dressed, including putting on braces or other devices and fastening
 buttons, zippers, snaps, or other closures, selecting appropriate attire,
 and dressing in the proper order.
 `(C) TOILETING- Going to a bathroom for bowel and bladder function,
 transferring on and off the toilet, cleaning after elimination, and
 arranging clothes.
 `(D) TRANSFERRING- Moving in and out of bed and in and out of a chair
 or wheelchair.
 `(E) EATING- Transferring food from a plate or its equivalent into the body,
 including cutting food so as to make possible safe ingestion.
 `(F) WALKING- Walking.
 `(2) ADULT DAY CARE- The term `adult day care' means a community-based
 program that provides services designed to--
 `(A) meet the need for adult day care for functionally impaired individuals
 in a structured, comprehensive program; and
 `(B) provide a variety of health and social services furnished by an adult
 day care center in an ambulatory group care setting during any part of
 a day, but on a less than 24-hour basis, to an individual eligible for
 benefits under this subpart.
Such services may include supervision and personal care, social, recreational,
and therapeutic services, meal and snack service, monitoring of medication and
health, nursing services (to the extent needed by participants), transportation
to and from the program, and such other services as specified in the care
plan of an individual.
 `(3) ADULT DAY CARE CENTER-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `adult day care center' means a public agency
 or private organization (or a subdivision thereof), with an identifiable
 administrative unit headed by a director, that meets such standards for
 personnel, program, physical characteristics of the facility, recordkeeping,
 and such other aspects of the function of such center as the USHealth Board
 considers necessary or desirable for the health, safety, and effective
 treatment of patients and establishes by regulation.
 `(B) PROFESSIONAL ORGANIZATION STANDARDS- In promulgating such regulations,
 the USHealth Board shall carefully consider certification standards
 established by the National Council on Aging and its professional membership
 unit, the National Institute for Adult Day Care.
 `(C) PERSONNEL- Such standards shall include the participation in the
 provision of the services of the center of a multidisciplinary group of
 personnel that includes at least--
 `(i) one physician or nurse practitioner, which could be the individual's
 own physician or nurse practitioner;
 `(ii) one registered professional nurse;
 `(iii) one social worker;
 `(iv) individuals with skills representing physical, recreational,
 occupational, or speech therapy; and
 `(v) a dietitian.
Such personnel may be employed directly by the center or on a consultant
basis, as specified by the USHealth Board by regulation.
 `(D) STATE CERTIFICATION- To be considered an adult health care center
 under this subpart, a center shall be certified by a State, pursuant to
 regulations issued by the USHealth Board.
 `(4) CARE PLAN-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `care plan' means a plan that has been developed by
 a Case Management Agency, or a home care or home health agency working under
 contract with the Case Management Agency to provide case management services
 or other qualified service provider under such a contract. Such a care plan
 shall be based on the results of a comprehensive needs assessment of an
 eligible individual conducted by a case management team in cooperation with
 the individual, the family of the individual, or other informal caregivers,
 and in consultation with such other health professionals as the case
 management team considers appropriate for the needs of the individual. A
 care plan developed by a home care or home health agency or qualified
 service provider is subject to review and approval by the Case Management
 Agency. Any entity performing case management services for individuals
 determined eligible for services under this subpart shall not be allowed
 to self-refer for services included in the care plan of such individual.
 `(B) CONTENTS- The plan shall--
 `(i) include a definition of specific outcome goals on which improvement,
 reduced rate of decline, maintenance, or improved quality of life for the
 individual is expected; and
 `(ii) identify the specific mix of services necessary to meet the outcome
 goals allotted to the patient and reimbursable under this subpart as
 determined by the procedure described in section 1833.
 `(5) Case management services-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `case management services' means services
 performed by a case management team that include--
 `(i) conducting a comprehensive needs assessment in cooperation with an
 individual and the family of an individual and in consultation with such
 other health professionals (including a physical therapist, occupational
 therapist, nurse practitioner, certified dietitian, or physician) as the
 case management team considers appropriate for the needs of the individual
 to assess the physical, social, cognitive, and environmental status of
 the individual;
 `(ii) developing, implementing, and modifying (when necessary) the care
 plan of an individual;
 `(iii) coordinating the services provided under the care plan;
 `(iv) monitoring the care plan to ensure the quality, quantity, timeliness,
 and effectiveness of the services;
 `(v) monitoring the progress of an individual toward achievement of the
 goals specified in the care plan; and
 `(vi) reviewing and revising, as necessary, the care plan at least once
 every three months or earlier in the event that the condition of the
 individual changes.
 `(B) REQUIREMENT- Individuals providing case management services to children
 and the disabled under this subpart shall demonstrate their experience
 with the special needs of these populations.
 `(6) CASE MANAGEMENT TEAM- The term `case management team' means a registered
 professional nurse and a qualified social worker (who is licensed or
 certified, if applicable, in the State in which the individual is providing
 services), working in consultation with other health professionals as needed,
 who are employed by a Case Management Agency or by a certified home health
 agency, home care agency, or other private nonprofit organization under
 contract with the agency to provide case management services pursuant to
 the requirements of this subpart and standards prescribed by the USHealth
 Board by regulation. Such nurse and social worker shall meet standards of
 education, training, and experience established by the Board by regulation
 to qualify to provide case management services under this subpart. The
 case management team for any person determined eligible for services under
 this subpart and described in section 1831(a)(1)(A)(ii) shall also include
 a physician. The case management team shall be available to the extent
 required to handle emergency cases in a timely manner.
 `(7) COMPREHENSIVE NEEDS ASSESSMENT- The term `comprehensive needs
 assessment' means a comprehensive interdisciplinary assessment of the status
 and needs of an individual that is conducted by a case management team. The
 assessment shall address functional status (including activities of daily
 living), instrumental activities of daily living (such as housekeeping,
 shopping, transportation, meal preparation, and taking medication), medically
 defined conditions, drug regimen, nutrition status, mental status, living
 arrangement, and availability of caregiver support.
 `(8) HEAVY CHORE SERVICES- The term `heavy chore services' means heavy
 cleaning and minor home repair. Chore services may not be used to perform
 activities that are the responsibility of a housing authority or landlord,
 or both. Heavy chore services shall be provided by personnel not requiring
 special training but who work under supervision of the case management
 agency or other qualified provider. Heavy chore services include those
 services determined by a case manager to be necessary to protect the health
 and safety of an individual such as washing floors and walls, woodcutting,
 changing storm windows, replacing window panes, door and window locks,
 installing minor home adaptations, snow shoveling, weatherization, and
 such other needed heavy chore services as are specified by a case manager.
 `(9) HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED CARE SERVICES- The term `home and
 community-based care services' means items and services provided to an
 individual--
 `(A) under a written plan of care for furnishing such items and services
 to the individual;
 `(B) except as provided clauses (iv), (v), and (xii) of subparagraph (C),
 on a visiting basis in a place of residence of the individual and in other
 facilities (but not including a nursing facility); and
 `(C) that include (except as provided in the last sentence of this
 paragraph)--
 `(i) homemaker services;
 `(ii) home health aide services;
 `(iii) heavy chore services;
 `(iv) adult day care provided at an adult day care center;
 `(v) respite care;
 `(vi) hospice care;
 `(vii) home mobility aids and minor adaptations to the home of the individual
 that promote independence (such as installation of an emergency alarm
 system, railings, ramps, and special toilets) that are approved by the
 case manager and included in the care plan of the individual;
 `(viii) nursing care provided by or under the supervision of a registered
 professional nurse;
 `(ix) medical social work services;
 `(x) physical, occupational, speech, or respiratory therapy or rehabilitative
 services to preserve and restore functional capability or to prevent
 functional deterioration;
 `(xi) transportation to and from health or social services;
 `(xii) nutrition and dietary counseling provided by or under the supervision
 of a qualified dietitian; and
 `(xiii) any of the items and services referred to in clauses (i) through
 (xii)--
 `(I) that are provided on an outpatient basis, under arrangements made by
 the case manager, at a hospital or nursing facility, or at a rehabilitation
 center that meets such standards as may be prescribed in regulation; and
 `(II) the furnishing of which cannot readily be made available to the
 individual in such place of residence, or can be provided more economically
 or effectively in such hospital, facility, or center.
Such term does not include home health services to the extent payment for
such services may be made under part A (or under a qualified health plan).
 `(10) HOME CARE AGENCY- The term `home care agency' means an agency in any
 State that has been certified by the State to provide home care services
 pursuant to regulations of the USHealth Board. Such services include
 homemaker services, heavy chore services, and respite services.
 `(11) HOME HEALTH AGENCY- The term `home health agency' means an agency in
 any State that has been certified by the USHealth Board to provide home
 health services. Such services shall include home health aide services,
 homemaker services, nursing services, respite services, medical social
 work services, and occupational, physical, speech therapy, and nutrition
 and dietary counseling.
 `(12) HOME HEALTH AIDE SERVICES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `home health aide services' means the services
 provided by a home health aide who meets such educational, training, and
 any other requirements as the USHealth Board shall establish by regulation
 and who is employed by a home health or home care agency or whose services
 are provided under a contract with, or subcontract on behalf of, a Case
 Management Agency.
 `(B) SERVICES- Such services shall include--
 `(i) providing personal care in following the instructions of the case
 management team of an individual under the supervision of a registered
 professional nurse or, if appropriate, a physical, speech, or occupational
 therapist;
 `(ii) assisting the individual with activities of daily living;
 `(iii) assisting the individual with the taking of medications ordered by
 a physician, that are ordinarily self-administered;
 `(iv) assisting and reinforcing the individual with necessary self-help
 skills; and
 `(v) reporting to the registered professional nurse supervisor any change
 in the condition or family situation of the individual.
 `(13) HOMEMAKER SERVICES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The term `homemaker services' means services provided by a
 homemaker who meets such educational, training, and any other requirements
 as the USHealth Board shall establish by regulation and who is employed by
 a home health or home care agency or who are working under contract with,
 or subcontract on behalf of, a Case Management Agency.
 `(B) SERVICES- Homemaker services may include--
 `(i) organizing the homemaking activity of the household with the active
 participation of an individual, if possible, and other responsible family
 members;
 `(ii) coordinating efforts of other family members in planning and carrying
 out the duties necessary for the normal functioning of the household;
 `(iii) performing routine housekeeping tasks, planning and preparing meals,
 doing the marketing and simple errands, and taking care of light laundry;
 `(iv) assisting the individual with personal care services including
 performing activities of daily living; and
 `(v) performing such incidental household services as are essential
 to the care of an individual at home, such as reporting to a registered
 professional nurse supervisor changes in the condition or family situation
 of the individual and following a written case plan established by a case
 management team.
 `(14) NURSING FACILITY- The term `nursing facility' means an institution
 that meets the requirements of section 1919 (as such section was in effect
 on the date of the enactment of the USHealth Program Act of 1991).
 `(15) RESPITE CARE- The term `respite care' means care or services
 provided to an individual for the purpose of providing temporary relief
 to a primary caregiver who is providing regular care to the individual
 without compensation. Such term includes care provided in the home or
 in the community and may include companion services, homemaker services,
 personal assistance, adult day care, temporary overnight care in accredited
 or licensed facilities, or such other services provided for the purpose
 of respite care, as specified by a Care Management Agency in the care plan
 of the individual.
 `(17) SPELL OF ILLNESS- The term `spell of illness' means a period of
 consecutive days beginning with the first day on which an individual is
 furnished a covered service under this subpart and ending with the close
 of the first 6 consecutive months thereafter during which the individual
 is not an inpatient of a hospital or a nursing facility.
`Subpart 2--Certain Preventive Benefits
`ELIGIBILITY
 `SEC. 1840A. (a) IN GENERAL- Each individual described in section 1806(a)(2)
 shall be eligible for benefits under this subpart.
 `(b) ENTITLEMENT- Each eligible individual is entitled to benefits
 under this subpart for services furnished during any period (beginning
 on or after January 1 of the second year beginning after the date of the
 enactment of the USHealth Program Act of 1991) in which the individual is
 an eligible individual, except that payment for such benefits shall not be
 made until the individual (1) is identified as an eligible individual, and
 (2) a suitable identification account number has been established under
 section 1806 for purposes of the administration of this title.
`CERTAIN PREVENTIVE BENEFITS
 `SEC. 1840B. (a) IN GENERAL- Except as otherwise provided in this subpart,
 an individual entitled to benefits under this subpart is entitled to
 coverage for the following items and services (if furnished on or after
 January 1 of the 2nd year beginning after the date of the enactment of
 the USHealth Program Act of 1991) to the extent they are not preventive
 services (as defined in section 1861(kk)(1)):
 `(1) ROUTINE PHYSICAL CHECKUPS- Routine physical checkups, not to exceed
 one such checkup in any two-year period (or such other lesser frequency as
 the USHealth Board determines to be medically appropriate). Such checkups
 shall include such screening examinations and laboratory tests as deemed
 appropriate by the Board.
 `(2) ROUTINE EYE CARE-
 `(A) VISION EXAMINATIONS-
 `(i) Subject to clause (ii), vision examinations, including--
 `(I) case history,
 `(II) external examination of the eyes and adexa,
 `(III) opthalmoscopic examination,
 `(IV) determination of refractive status,
 `(V) bionucular balance testing,
 `(VI) tonometry test for glaucoma when indicated, and
 `(VII) prescription for corrective lenses if indicated,
but not to exceed one such examination for an individual in any 12-month
period.
 `(ii) LIMITATION- Clause (i) includes low-vision examinations only when best
 corrected vision in the better eye does not equal 20/70 but is better than
 light perception or light projection or vision field is restricted to 30
 degrees or less and only when provided by an opthamologist or optometrist
 who is qualified (as determined by USHealth Board) to provide such an
 examination.
 `(B) DISPENSING CORRECTIVE LENSES-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- Subject to clause (ii), dispensing (by an opthamologist,
 optometrist, or optician licensed to dispense corrective lenses in the State
 in which the corrective lenses are dispensed) of prescription corrective
 lenses, including--
 `(I) facial measurement and determination of interpupillary distance,
 `(II) assistance in selection of frames,
 `(III) procurement of quality frames and lenses,
 `(IV) fitting and adjustment of corrective lenses, and
 `(V) periodic refitting and adjustment of corrective lenses,
but not to exceed the dispensing of a single set of corrective lenses for
an individual more often than once in any 12-month period.
 `(ii) LIMITATION- Clause (i) shall not apply with respect to an individual
 unless a vision examination described in subparagraph (A) has determined
 that the individual's vision, through the use of conventional corrective
 lenses, can be corrected to a normal level of sight (as specified by the
 USHealth Board).
 `(C) CORRECTIVE LENSES DEFINED- In this subsection and section 1840C,
 the term `corrective lenses' means eyeglasses (including frames) and
 contact lenses.
 `(3) DENTAL CARE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Dental services (other than those described in subparagraph
 (B)) furnished to individuals under 21 years of age or, in the case of
 services described in clause (vi), individuals of any age, including--
 `(i) teeth cleaning, whether performed by a dentist or by a licensed dental
 hygienist under the order or supervision of a dentist, but not to exceed
 one cleaning in any 12-month period;
 `(ii) radiographs (other than for purposes of endodontic therapy), but
 not to exceed one full series in any 12-month period, and a panographic
 radiograph in the case of an edentulous individual;
 `(iii) a dental examination, including an evaluation for oral cancer or
 oral pathology, a dental tissue examination (with charting of caries and
 defective restorations), and a periodontal evaluation of existing teeth;
 `(iv) tooth extractions;
 `(v) simple restorations;
 `(vi) services (including necessary crowns and bridges) required for the
 furnishing of (I) full or partial dentures (meeting standards established
 under subparagraph (B)), but not to exceed one complete set (or the
 replacement, repair, rebasing, or relining of such dentures) every 5 years,
 (II) over dentures, and (III) the use of temporary, partial dentures
 pending extraction of teeth for full dentures;
 `(vii) surgical preparation of edentulous ridges (but not more often than
 once every 5 years);
 `(viii) periodontal therapy; and
 `(ix) endodontics.
 `(B) EXCLUSION- Dental services do not include--
 `(i) orthodontic care (except as may be permitted by the USHealth Board
 in the care of individuals under 21 years of age);
 `(ii) crown and bridgework beyond such extent as the USHealth Board may
 provide;
 `(iii) cosmetic surgery or dentistry; or
 `(iv) the furnishing of dentures unless--
 `(I) the dentures furnished have been certified by the USHealth Board to
 meet such quality standards as the Board establishes, and
 `(II) the dentures are inscribed with the name or other identification of
 the individual for whom the dentures are made.
 `(C) INSCRIPTION SERVICE INCLUDED- Dental services also include the
 inscription (described in subparagraph (B)(iv)(II)) on dentures of the
 name or other identification of an individual, in the case of dentures
 made before the effective date of this subpart.
 `(4) HEARING CARE- Hearing examinations and aids as follows:
 `(A) HEARING THRESHOLD TEST- A hearing threshold test, conducted by a
 physician or qualified audiologist, but not more often than once every
 2 years.
 `(B) COMPREHENSIVE AUDIOMETRIC ASSESSMENT AND DISPENSING OF HEARING AID-
 For an individual determined to have a significant communicative difficulty--
 `(i) a comprehensive audiometric assessment by a physician or qualified
 audiologist, but not more often than once every 2 years;
 `(ii) if the individual is determined (as a result of such an assessment)
 to have a difficulty which can be appropriately treated with a hearing aid--
 `(I) a hearing aid assessment by a physician or qualified audiologist in
 order to determine the appropriate hearing aid to be dispensed,
 `(II) the dispensing by a physician, qualified audiologist, or hearing
 aid dealer of a hearing aid that is certified under subsection (d) and
 instruction on its use, except that dispensing of such a hearing aid is
 limited to the dispensing of one such aid in any 3-year period and does
 not include any batteries required for use of such hearing aid or any
 repairs which such aid may require, and
 `(III) if the hearing aid is furnished by a hearing aid dealer, a
 post-fitting examination and orientation by a physician or qualified
 audiologist; and
 `(iii) if the individual is determined (as a result of such an assessment)
 to have a difficulty which cannot be appropriately treated with the
 provision of a hearing aid but can be appropriately treated through
 aural rehabilitative instruction, the provision of such instruction by a
 qualified audiologist, but not to exceed 4 hours for any individual during
 the individual's lifetime.
For purposes of subparagraph (B), an individual has a significant communicative
difficulty if the individual is determined, under the test described in
subparagraph (A), to have pure tone hearing thresholds at 500, 1000, 2000,
or 3000 hertz in both ears of not greater than 25 decibels, when averaged
across such frequencies.
 `(b) SPECIAL RULES FOR CHILDREN- In the case of services described in
 subsection (a) furnished to children under 21 years of age, routine physical
 checkups under subsection (a)(1), routine eye examinations under subsection
 (a)(2)(A)(i), routine dental examinations under subsection (a)(3)(A)(iii),
 and hearing threshold tests under subsection (a)(4)(A) shall be available
 at such intervals, which meet reasonable standards of medical practice,
 as determined by the USHealth Board after consultation with recognized
 medical organizations involved in child health care.
 `(c) SCOPE OF ROUTINE PHYSICAL CHECKUPS- A routine physical checkup under
 subsection (a)(1) shall at a minimum include--
 `(1) a comprehensive health and developmental history (including assessment
 of both physical and mental health development),
 `(2) a comprehensive unclothed physical exam,
 `(3) appropriate immunizations according to age and health history,
 `(4) laboratory tests (including lead blood level assessment appropriate
 for age and risk factors), and
 `(5) health education (including anticipatory guidance).
 `(d) QUALITY CERTIFICATION- The USHealth Board shall provide for a program
 for the certification of the safety and efficacy of hearing aids for which
 payment may be made under this subpart. Under such program, a hearing aid
 may not be certified unless--
 `(1) the aid has been determined to be safe and effective in the treatment
 of the hearing difficulty for which it is to be used; and
 `(2) the manufacturer or supplier of such aid provides a warranty against
 failure of such aid to operate during at least the first year after the
 date the aid is initially dispensed.
`PAYMENT FOR BENEFITS
 `SEC. 1840C. (a) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this section, the amount
 of payment to be made for benefits under this subpart shall be the same
 amount as would be paid for such benefits under part A if such benefits
 were considered to be included in medical and other health services under
 such part.
 `(b) NO DEDUCTIBLE AND COINSURANCE- There shall be no deductible or
 coinsurance applicable to payment for benefits under this subpart.
 `(c) PAYMENT AMOUNT FOR CORRECTIVE LENSES- In the case of dispensing of
 corrective lenses under section 1840B(a)(2)(B), the amount of payment
 under this subpart shall be equal to the sum of the following elements:
 `(1) With respect to eyeglass frames, the reasonable competitive price
 (as determined through a competitive bidding system established by the
 USHealth Board) at which the eyeglass frames of adequate quality are made
 reasonably available to major wholesale purchasers of such frames.
 `(2) The lowest normal and usual cost for obtaining corrective lenses
 (other than eyeglass frames), of appropriate type and adequate quality to
 treat the individual's visual impairment, in the area.
 `(3) A reasonable fee for the professional services usually and normally
 associated with the dispensing of such corrective lenses.
 `(d) PAYMENT AMOUNT FOR HEARING AIDS- In the case of dispensing of a
 hearing aid under section 1840B(a)(4)(B)(ii), the amount of payment under
 this subpart shall be equal to the wholesale cost of the least expense
 hearing aids which are certified, in accordance with section 1840B(d),
 as appropriate for treatment of the individual's hearing impairment and
 which are (or could be made) reasonably available in the area in which
 the hearing aids are dispensed.
 `(e) LIMIT ON PAYMENT AMOUNT FOR DENTURES- In the case of furnishing of
 dentures under section 1840B(a)(3), the USHealth Board may provide for
 such reasonable limits on the amounts that will be recognized as the Board
 provides by regulation, taking into account the costs necessary in the
 efficient provision of such service.
 `(f) RELATION TO PART A AND QUALIFIED EMPLOYER HEALTH PLANS- No payment
 may be made under this subpart with respect to any services or items
 furnished an individual to the extent that such individual is entitled
 (without any deductible or coinsurance) to have payment made with respect
 to such services or items under part A or under a qualified health plan.
`GENERAL PROVISIONS
 `SEC. 1840D. Under rules established by the USHealth Board, to the extent
 not inconsistent with the provisions of this subpart, the provisions of
 part A shall apply to benefits under this subpart in the same manner as
 they apply to benefits under such part.'.
SEC. 202. GRANTS FOR TRAINING FOR HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED CARE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The USHealth Board (in this title referred to as the `Board')
 shall make grants to schools of nursing, social work, allied health, and
 public health of accredited universities to develop and conduct programs
 to train individuals in the provision, supervision, planning, and analysis
 of home and community-based care and nursing facility services for the
 elderly, disabled, and chronically ill children and in the administration
 of such programs.
 (b) USE OF FUNDS- Funding made available under this section may be used for
 curriculum development, faculty support, and traineeships and fellowships.
 (c) GRANT PREFERENCES- In awarding grants under this section, the Board
 shall give a preference to programs that--
 (1) provide for the development or conduct of programs for continuing
 education and certification of professionals currently working in the
 field of geriatric health in the provision of services to the chronically
 impaired and working in the field of pediatric care specialization in
 the provision of care services to chronically ill, disabled, and medical
 technology dependent children;
 (2) have established or will establish affiliations with nursing facilities,
 agencies providing home and community-based care, senior citizen centers,
 adult day care centers, and other institutions and agencies providing
 health and social services to the impaired elderly, for the purpose
 of providing in-service training to individuals being trained at the
 grant-receiving institution and technical assistance to the institution
 providing services; and
 (3) have established or will establish affiliations with programs of
 geriatric training based in accredited medical schools or schools of nursing,
 or both.
 (d) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 to carry out this section $15,000,000 for fiscal year 1993, $20,000,000
 for fiscal year 1994, and $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1995.
SEC. 203. GRANTS FOR HOME HEALTH AIDES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Board shall make grants to State approved programs
 (that meet requirements established by the Board relating to minimum course
 hours, curriculum content, competency evaluation, and qualifications of
 instructors) to develop and conduct programs to train individuals in the
 provision of home health aide services. Such training programs shall be
 designed and conducted according to guidelines and requirements established
 by the Board by regulation.
 (b) GRANT PREFERENCES- Preference shall be given to programs that have
 established or will have established affiliations with nursing facilities,
 agencies providing home and community-based care, senior citizen centers,
 adult day care centers, and other institutions providing health and social
 services to the impaired elderly, for the purpose of providing in-service
 training to individuals being trained at the grant-receiving program and
 technical assistance to the institution providing services.
 (c) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 to carry out this section $10,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1993
 and 1994 and $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1995.
SEC. 204. GRANTS FOR MODEL CONSUMER TRAINING PROGRAMS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Board shall make grants available to accredited
 university schools of nursing to develop model consumer training
 programs. Such programs shall provide information and training about
 the delivery of home care services for caregivers as well as general
 information about the home and community-based care service system for
 consumers or potential consumers of home care or home health services,
 or both, pursuant to regulations established by the Board.
 (b) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 to carry out this section $5,000,000 for fiscal year 1993, $10,000,000
 for fiscal year 1994, and $15,000,000 for fiscal year 1995.
SEC. 205. CENTERS FOR LONG-TERM CARE PLANNING AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Board shall through grants or contracts, or both,
 assist public or private nonprofit entities in meeting the costs of planning
 and developing new centers, and operating existing and new centers, for
 multidisciplinary health planning development and assistance under this
 section for the purpose of--
 (1) assisting the Board in carrying out subpart 1 of part B of title XVIII
 of the Social Security Act;
 (2) providing such technical and consulting assistance as States may require;
 (3) conducting research, studies, and analysis of planning and resource
 development for the provision of long-term care services; and
 (4) developing long-term care planning approaches, methodologies, policies,
 and standards.
 (b) NUMBER OF CENTERS- The Board shall provide assistance under this section
 so that at least 6 such centers shall be in operation by January 1, 1993.
 (c) CASE-MANAGEMENT AGENCIES- Agencies assisted under this section--
 (1) may enter into arrangements with Case Management Agencies for the
 provision of such services as may be appropriate and necessary in assisting
 the agencies in performing their functions under subpart 1 of part B of
 title XVIII of the Social Security Act; and
 (2) shall develop and use methods (satisfactory to the Board) to disseminate
 to such agencies long-term care planning approaches, methodologies,
 policies, and standards.
 (d) Staff-
 (1) DIRECTOR- Each center shall have a full-time director who possesses
 a demonstrated capacity for substantial accomplishment and leadership in
 the field of planning and resource development in the area of long-term care.
 (2) ADDITIONAL STAFF- Each center shall employ such other additional staff
 as may be appropriate. The staff of the center shall meet such additional
 requirements as the Board may by regulation prescribe.
 (e) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 to carry out this section $10,000,000 for fiscal year 1993 and $15,000,000
 for each of the fiscal years 1994 and 1995.
SEC. 206. DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS FOR SERIOUSLY MENTALLY ILL INDIVIDUALS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Board shall conduct at least 5 (but not more than 10)
 demonstration projects to determine the relative effectiveness, cost,
 and impact on quality of long-term home care of using different models
 of providing and reimbursing long-term home care services for seriously
 mentally ill individuals and family caregivers.
 (b) DEFINITION- As used in section, the term `seriously mentally ill
 individual' means an individual who a licensed mental health professional
 in the individual's State of residence certifies--
 (1) has schizophrenia, bipolar or unipolar disorder or other significant
 mental illness that restrict the ability of the individual to function in
 activities of daily living, employment, and social interaction;
 (2) has been previously institutionalized or is at risk of being
 institutionalized in the absence of the services provided under this
 section; and
 (3) is not institutionalized at the time of the certification.
 (c) REQUIREMENTS- Demonstration projects conducted under this section shall--
 (1) each be conducted over a period of 3 years;
 (2) be conducted in sites that are chosen to be geographically diverse
 and include at least one rural site;
 (3) be sensitive to the needs of racial and ethnic minorities;
 (4) include outreach and case management activities;
 (5) be responsive to family needs and concerns and appropriately involve
 and consult with family members regarding the provision of services under
 this section;
 (6) specify, at the time of application, specific outcome expectations to
 be met by the project and identify appropriate mechanisms for measuring
 such outcomes; and
 (7) include testing the use of different agencies as Case Management
 Agencies and providing for the selection of such agencies in consultation
 with the Comptroller General.
 (d) OTHER SERVICES- Demonstration projects conducted under this section may--
 (1) provide services or reimbursement for nursing care, homemaker or home
 health aide services, psychosocial services, medical services, including
 the provision, monitoring, and testing of necessary medications, client
 and family education, training, and counseling, respite care, crisis
 intervention, information and referral services, and rehabilitation; and
 (2) provide services to seriously mentally ill individuals or provide
 services to home caregivers (including family members) when such services
 augment and support home caregivers in the care of seriously mentally
 ill individuals.
 (e) EVALUATION- The Board shall provide for the evaluation of the projects on
 a concurrent basis and shall prepare and submit to the appropriate Committees
 of Congress, not later than 18 months after the initiation of the projects
 and on the completion of the projects, a report on the findings of the
 evaluation. Such evaluation shall measure the cost and effectiveness of
 funded projects against the outcome expectations identified in the initial
 applications and include relevant data on client and family satisfaction
 and perceived benefits, together with such additional information as the
 Board may consider appropriate.
 (f) PAYMENTS- Payments under demonstration projects under this section
 may be made in advance or by way of reimbursement, as may be determined by
 the Board, and shall be made in such installments and on such conditions
 as the Board finds necessary to carry out the purpose of this section.
 (g) WAIVERS- The Board may waive such requirements of title XVIII of the
 Social Security Act as may be required to carry out demonstration projects
 under this section.
 (h) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS- There are authorized to be appropriated
 from the USHealth Program Trust Fund for each of the fiscal years 1993,
 1994, and 1995, not to exceed $10,000,000 to carry out demonstration
 projects under this section and not to exceed $1,000,000 to carry out the
 evaluation of such projects under subsection (e).
TITLE III--LOW-INCOME ASSISTANCE
SEC. 301. ASSISTANCE FOR LOW-INCOME INDIVIDUALS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Title XVIII of the Social Security Act is further amended
 by redesignating part C as part E and by inserting after part B (as inserted
 by section 201) the following new part:
`Part C--Assistance for Low-Income Individuals
`ASSISTANCE FOR INDIVIDUALS ENROLLED UNDER PART A
 `SEC. 1841. (a) INDIVIDUALS WITH INCOME BELOW THE POVERTY LINE- Except as
 otherwise provided in this section, in the case of an individual who is
 enrolled under part A (other than on an employment basis) and whose family
 adjusted total income (as defined in section 1847(1)) does not exceed
 100 percent of the official poverty line (as defined in section 1847(4)),
 the low-income assistance under this part shall include--
 `(1) waiver of any premiums imposed under part A, and
 `(2) waiver of any deductibles or coinsurance under part A for the individual
 and the individual's family.
In the case of a such an individual whose premium is collected through a
deduction from a benefit under title II of this Act or under the Railroad
Retirement Act, the assistance described in paragraph (1) shall be provided
in a manner so that no such premium amount is deducted from monthly benefits
or transfers.
 `(b) INDIVIDUALS WITH INCOME BETWEEN 100 AND 200 PERCENT OF THE POVERTY
 LINE- In the case of an individual who is enrolled under part A (other than
 on an employment basis) and whose family adjusted total income exceeds
 100 percent, but is less than 200 percent, of the official poverty line,
 the low-income assistance under this part shall include the following:
 `(1) PREMIUMS- Subject to subsection (c), if the family adjusted total
 income--
 `(A) is less than 133 1/3 percent of such poverty line, there will be
 no premium,
 `(B) is at least 133 1/3 percent, but less than 166 2/3 percent, of such
 poverty line, the beneficiary premium amount under part A shall be reduced
 so that the monthly premium amount does not exceed 1/12 of 1 percent of
 the family's adjusted total income, or
 `(C) is at least 166 2/3 percent, but less than 200 percent, of such
 poverty line, the beneficiary premium amount under part A shall be reduced
 so that the monthly premium amount does not exceed 1/12 of 2 percent of
 the family's adjusted total income.
Any reduction in premium under subparagraph (B) or (C) shall be rounded to
the nearest multiple of $5.
 `(2) DEDUCTIBLE- Each deductible under part A shall be reduced by the
 subsidy percentage of the deductible otherwise applied. Any reduction
 in the deductible under this paragraph shall be rounded to the nearest
 multiple of $10.
 `(3) COINSURANCE- The percentage coinsurance applied under part A shall be
 reduced by the subsidy percentage multiplied by the percentage coinsurance
 otherwise applied.
 `(c) LIMIT ON PART A PREMIUM TO 3 PERCENT OF ADJUSTED TOTAL INCOME- In
 the case of any individual who is enrolled under part A (other than on an
 employment related basis) and whose family adjusted total income is equal
 to or exceeds 200 percent of the official poverty line, the low-income
 assistance under this part shall include a reduction in the beneficiary
 premium amount under part A so that the monthly amount does not exceed
 1/12 of 3 percent of the family's adjusted total income. Any reduction in
 premium under this subsection shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $5.
 `(d) SUBSIDY PERCENTAGE DEFINED-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In this section and sections 1842 and 1843, the term
 `subsidy percentage' means the number of percentage points by which the
 family's adjusted total income (expressed as a percent of the applicable
 official poverty line) is less than 200 percent.
 `(2) ROUNDING FOR COINSURANCE- For purposes of subsection (b)(3), and
 sections 1842(b)(1), 1842(c)(1), and 1843(b), the subsidy percentage (as
 applied to the coinsurance percentage) shall be rounded to the nearest
 multiple of 5 percent.
`ASSISTANCE FOR INDIVIDUALS ENROLLED UNDER QUALIFIED EMPLOYER HEALTH PLANS
 `SEC. 1842. (a) IN GENERAL- In the case of an eligible individual described
 in section 1806(a)(2) who is enrolled under a qualified employer health plan
 or is enrolled under part A on an employment basis, low-income assistance
 under this part shall include--
 `(1) payment (in a manner specified by the USHealth Board) of the premium
 subsidy under subsection (b) to the individual or another family member,
 or, in the case described in subsection (b)(4), the employer, and
 `(2) payment to the plan of the deductible and coinsurance subsidy under
 subsection (c).
Such subsidies shall apply to premiums, deductibles, and coinsurance for the
individual and family members covered on an employment basis under the plan
or under part A.
 `(b) PREMIUM SUBSIDY-
 `(1) AMOUNT-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The amount of the premium subsidy under this subsection is
 the amount by which the employee share of the premium exceeds the applicable
 percent of the family adjusted total income of the employee. Any premium
 subsidy under this paragraph which is not a multiple of $5 shall be rounded
 to the nearest multiple of $5.
 `(B) APPLICABLE PERCENT DEFINED- In subparagraph (A), the term `applicable
 percent' means, in the case of an individual whose family adjusted total
 income--
 `(i) is less than 133 1/3 percent of the official income poverty line,
 0 percent,
 `(ii) is at least 133 1/3 percent, but less than 166 2/3 percent, of
 such poverty line, 1 percent,
 `(iii) is at least 166 2/3 percent, but less than 200 percent, of such
 poverty line, 2 percent, or
 `(iv) is at least 200 percent of such poverty line, 3 percent.
 `(2) USE OF LEAST EXPENSIVE QUALIFIED PLAN- In applying paragraph (1),
 the amount of the premium subsidy shall be based on the qualified employer
 health plan available to the employee with the smallest premium payment
 required of the employee (for the type of family enrollment with which
 the employee is enrolled).
 `(3) FREQUENCY OF PAYMENT- Except as provided in paragraph (4), the
 premium subsidy under this subsection shall be paid not less frequently
 than quarterly or, if the amount of the premium subsidy on a monthly basis
 exceeds $20, monthly.
 `(4) OPTIONAL, DIRECT COORDINATION WITH EMPLOYERS- In the case of an
 employee--
 `(A) who is enrolled under a covered employer health plan,
 `(B) who is entitled to assistance under this section,
 `(C) whose employer agrees to enter into an arrangement with the USHealth
 Board under this paragraph, and
 `(D) who assigns (in the manner specified by the Board) rights to premium
 subsidies under this subsection to the employer,
the Board shall enter into an arrangement with the employer under which (i)
the employer agrees to reduce premiums otherwise imposed with respect to the
individual by the amount of the subsidy, and (ii) the Board agrees to make
payment (not less often than monthly) to the employer of the amount of such
premium subsidy.
 `(c) DEDUCTIBLE AND COINSURANCE SUBSIDY-
 `(1) DEDUCTIBLE SUBSIDY AMOUNT- The amount of the deductible subsidy under
 this subsection is the subsidy percentage (as defined in section 1841(d))
 of each deductible otherwise applied. Any deductible subsidy under this
 paragraph that is not a multiple of $10 shall be rounded to the nearest
 multiple of $10.
 `(2) COINSURANCE SUBSIDY AMOUNT- The amount of the coinsurance subsidy under
 this subsection is the product of the subsidy percentage, the percentage
 coinsurance otherwise applied, and the payment amount permitted for required
 health services.
 `(3) DIRECT COORDINATION BY PLAN REQUIRED- Each qualified employer health
 plan shall provide for--
 `(A) acceptance of information, electronically, from the USHealth Board
 on the amount of the deductible and coinsurance subsidy for individuals
 (and family members),
 `(B) a reduction in the deductibles and coinsurance otherwise imposed to
 reflect the deductible and coinsurance subsidies to which the individual
 and family members are entitled,
 `(C) reasonably prompt payment of bills for which such charges have been
 made, and
 `(D) transmission of such information as is necessary to indicate the
 amount of subsidy provided under the plan for specified individuals.
In return, the USHealth Board shall provide for payment, not less often
than monthly, to the plan of the amount of payments made by such a plan for
deductible and coinsurance subsidies under this subsection.
`ASSISTANCE FOR INDIVIDUALS ENTITLED TO BENEFITS UNDER PART B
 `SEC. 1843. (a) INDIVIDUALS WITH INCOME BELOW THE POVERTY LINE- Except as
 otherwise provided in this section, in the case of an individual who is
 entitled to benefits under part B and whose family adjusted total income
 (as defined in section 1847(1)) does not exceed 100 percent of the official
 poverty line (as defined in section 1847(4)), the low-income assistance
 under this part shall include waiver of any coinsurance under part B for
 the individual and the individual's family.
 `(b) INDIVIDUALS WITH INCOME BETWEEN 100 AND 200 PERCENT OF THE POVERTY LINE-
 In the case of an individual who is entitled to benefits under part B and
 whose family adjusted total income exceeds 100 percent, but is less than
 200 percent, of the official poverty line, the low-income assistance under
 this part shall include a reduction in the percentage coinsurance applied
 under part B by the subsidy percentage (as defined in section 1841(d))
 multiplied by the percentage coinsurance otherwise applied.
 `(c) PROTECTION AGAINST SPOUSAL IMPOVERISHMENT-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- In the case of an institutionalized spouse (as defined
 in paragraph (6)), the monthly coinsurance required under part B shall
 not exceed the difference between--
 `(A) 1/12 of the family adjusted total income, and
 `(B) the total monthly allowance permitted under paragraph (2).
 `(2) TOTAL ALLOWANCE- The total monthly allowance under this paragraph is
 the sum of the following:
 `(A) A personal needs allowance (for clothing and other personal needs of
 the institutionalized spouse) of $100 per month.
 `(B) A community spouse monthly income allowance equal to 200 percent
 of 1/12 of the official poverty line for a family unit of 2 members,
 but only to the extent income of couple is made available to (or for the
 benefit of) the community spouse.
 `(C) A family allowance, for each family member (as defined in paragraph
 (3)(C)), equal to 1/3 of the amount by which the amount described in
 subparagraph (B) exceeds the amount of the monthly income of that family
 member.
 `(D) Amounts for expenses incurred in the month for medical or remedial
 care for the institutionalized spouse that are not subject to payment by a
 third party (including health insurance premiums, deductibles, coinsurance,
 and necessary medical or remedial care, subject to reasonable limits the
 USHealth Board may establish on the amount of these expenses).
A revision of the official poverty line referred to in subparagraph (B)
shall apply to low-income assistance furnished during and after the second
calendar quarter that begins after the date of publication of the revision.
 `(3) DEFINITIONS- In this subsection:
 `(A) The term `institutionalized spouse' means an individual who--
 `(i) is in a nursing facility, and
 `(ii) is married to a spouse who is not in such a facility;
but does not include any such individual who is not likely to meet the
requirements of clause (i) for at least 30 consecutive days.
 `(B) The term `community spouse' means the spouse of an institutionalized
 spouse.
 `(C) The term `family member' only includes minor or dependent children,
 dependent parents, or dependent siblings of the institutionalized or
 community spouse who are residing with the community spouse.
`APPLICATIONS FOR ASSISTANCE
 `SEC. 1844. (a) IN GENERAL- Subject to section 1845, any individual who
 seeks assistance under this part (with respect to himself or herself or
 a family member) shall submit a written application, by person or mail,
 to the Board. The application may be submitted with an application to
 enroll under part A or part B of this title or otherwise.
 `(b) BASIS FOR DETERMINATION- Subject to section 1845 and reconciliation
 under such section, eligibility for assistance under this part shall be based
 on 12 times the family adjusted total income (as defined in section 1847(1))
 during the month preceding the month in which the application is filed.
 `(c) FORM AND CONTENTS- An application for assistance under this part shall
 be in a form and manner specified by the USHealth Board and shall require--
 `(1) the provision of information necessary to make the determinations
 described in subsection (b),
 `(2) the provision of information respecting any covered employer health
 plan in which the individual is enrolled, and
 `(3) the individual (if enrolled under such a plan) to assign rights for
 deductible and coinsurance subsidies under this part to such plan.
Such form also shall include an option to execute, as part of completing the
form and in order to meet the condition described in section 1842(b)(4)(D),
an assignment of an individual's right for premium subsidies under this part
to an employer.
 `(d) FREQUENCY OF APPLICATIONS-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- An application for assistance under this part may be filed
 at any time during the year and may be resubmitted based upon a change
 of income or family composition. However, except as provided in paragraph
 (3), such an application may not be resubmitted more frequently than once
 every 3 months.
 `(2) NEED TO REAPPLY- In the case of an individual who--
 `(A) is entitled to assistance under this part in September of a year, and
 `(B) wishes to remain eligible for benefits for months beginning with
 January of the following year,
the individual (or a family member) must file with the Board in October of
that preceding year a new application for assistance. If an individual that
fails to file a new application under this paragraph, an application for
such assistance with respect to any family member may not be filed during
November or December of that preceding year.
 `(3) CORRECTION OF INCOME- Nothing in paragraph (1) shall be construed
 as preventing an individual or family from, at any time, submitting an
 application to reduce the amount of assistance under this part based upon
 an increase in income from that stated in the previous application.
 `(e) TIMING OF ASSISTANCE-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- If an application for assistance under this part is filed--
 `(A) on or before the 15th day of a month, assistance under this part shall
 be available for premiums for months after such month and, with respect
 to the deductible and coinsurance, for expenses incurred after such month; or
 `(B) after the 15th day of a month, assistance under this part shall be
 available for premiums for months after the month following such month
 and, with respect to the deductible and coinsurance, for expenses incurred
 after such following month.
 `(2) WELFARE RECIPIENTS- In the case of an individual or family with
 respect to whom an application for assistance is not required because of
 section 1846, in applying paragraph (1), the date of approval of aid or
 benefits described in such section shall be considered the filing of an
 application for assistance under this part.
 `(f) VERIFICATION- The USHealth Board shall provide for verification, on
 a sample basis or other basis, of the information supplied in applications
 under this part. This verification shall be separate from the reconciliation
 provided under section 1845.
 `(g) HELP IN COMPLETING APPLICATIONS- The USHealth Board shall provide,
 from funds appropriated to carry out this title, for grants to public
 or private nonprofit entities that will make available assistance to
 individuals and families in filing applications for assistance under this
 part. The Board shall make grants in a manner that provides such assistance
 at a variety of sites (such as low-income housing projects and shelters
 for homeless individuals) that are readily accessible to individuals and
 families eligible for assistance under this part.
 `(h) PENALTIES FOR INACCURATE INFORMATION-
 `(1) INTEREST FOR UNDERSTATEMENTS- Each individual who knowingly
 understates income reported in an application for assistance under this
 part or otherwise makes a material misrepresentation of information in
 such an application shall be liable to the Federal Government for excess
 payments made based on such understatement or misrepresentation, and for
 interest on such excess payments at a rate specified by the Board.
 `(2) PENALTIES FOR MISREPRESENTATION- Each individual who knowingly
 misrepresents material information in an application for assistance under
 this part shall be liable to the Federal Government for $1,000 for each
 such misrepresentation or, if greater, three times the excess payments
 made based on such misrepresentation.
 `(i) FILING OF APPLICATION DEFINED- Except as provided in subsection
 (e)(2), for purposes of this part, an application under this part is
 considered to be `filed' on the date on which the complete application,
 including all documentation required to act on the application, has been
 filed with the Board.
`RECONCILIATION OF PREMIUM ASSISTANCE THROUGH USE OF INCOME STATEMENTS
 `SEC. 1845. (a) REQUIREMENT FOR FILING OF INCOME STATEMENT- Subject
 to section 1846, in the case of a family which is receiving low-income
 assistance under this part for any month in a year, a member of the family
 shall file with the Board, by not later than April 15 of the following
 year, a statement that verifies the family's total adjusted family income
 for the taxable year ending during the previous year. Such a statement
 shall provide information necessary to determine the family adjusted total
 income during the year and the number of family members in the family as
 of the last day of the year.
 `(b) RECONCILIATION OF PREMIUM ASSISTANCE BASED ON ACTUAL INCOME- Based
 on and using the income reported in the statement filed under subsection
 (a) with respect to a family or individual, subject to section 1846,
 the Board shall compute the amount of assistance that should have been
 provided under this part with respect to premiums for the family in the
 year involved. If the amount of such assistance computed is--
 `(1) greater than the amount of premium assistance provided, the Board
 shall provide for payment (directly or through a credit against future
 premiums owed) to the family or individual involved of an amount equal to
 the amount of the deficit, or
 `(2) less than the amount of assistance provided, the Board shall require
 the family or individual to pay (directly or through an increase in future
 premiums owed) to the Board (to the credit of the USHealth Program Trust
 Fund) an amount equal to the amount of the excess payment.
 `(c) DISQUALIFICATION FOR FAILURE TO FILE- Subject to section 1846, in
 the case of any family that is required to file an information statement
 under subsection (a) in a year and that fails to file such a statement by
 the deadline specified in such subsection, no member of the family shall
 be eligible for assistance under this part after May 1 of such year. The
 USHealth Board shall waive the application of this subsection if the family
 establishes, to the satisfaction of the Board, good cause for the failure
 to file the statement on a timely basis.
 `(d) PENALTIES FOR FALSE INFORMATION- Any individual that provides false
 information in a statement under subsection (a) is subject to a criminal
 penalty to the same extent as a criminal penalty may be imposed under section
 1128B(a) with respect to a person described in clause (ii) of such section.
 `(e) NOTICE OF REQUIREMENT- The USHealth Board shall provide for written
 notice, in March of each year, of the requirement of subsection (a) to
 each family which received assistance under this part in any month during
 the preceding year and to which such requirement applies.
 `(f) TRANSMITTAL OF INFORMATION- The Secretary of the Treasury shall transmit
 annually to the USHealth Board such information relating to the adjusted
 total income of individuals for the taxable year ending in the previous
 year as may be necessary to verify the reconciliation of assistance under
 this section.
 `(g) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this section shall be construed as authorizing
 reconciliation of assistance provided with respect to deductibles and
 coinsurance.
`TREATMENT OF CERTAIN CASH ASSISTANCE RECIPIENTS
 `SEC. 1846. In the case of a family that has been determined to be
 eligible for aid under part A or E of title IV or an individual who has
 been determined to be eligible for supplemental security income benefits
 under title XVI--
 `(1) the family or individual is deemed, without the need to file an
 application for assistance under section 1844, to have adjusted total
 income below 100 percent of the official poverty line applicable to a
 family of the size involved,
 `(2) the family or individual need not file a statement under section
 1845(a), and
 `(3) the assistance received by the family is not subject to reconciliation
 under section 1845(b).
`COMPUTATION OF FAMILY ADJUSTED TOTAL INCOME
 `SEC. 1847. In this part:
 `(1) ADJUSTED TOTAL INCOME- The term `adjusted total income' means--
 `(A) adjusted gross income (as defined in section 62(a) of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986), determined without the application of paragraphs
 (6) and (7) of such section and without the application of section 162(l)
 of such Code, plus
 `(B) the amount of social security benefits (described in section 86(d)
 of such Code) which is not includable in gross income under section 86 of
 such Code.
 `(2) FAMILY ADJUSTED TOTAL INCOME- The term `family adjusted total income'
 means, with respect to an individual, the sum of the adjusted total income
 for the individual and all the other family members.
 `(3) FAMILY SIZE- The family size to be applied under this part, with respect
 to family adjusted total income, is the number of individuals included
 in the family for purposes of coverage of health insurance benefits under
 this title or under a qualified employer health plan (as the case may be).
 `(4) OFFICIAL POVERTY LINE- The term `official poverty line' means,
 for an individual in a family, the official poverty line (as defined by
 the Office of Management and Budget, and revised annually in accordance
 with section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981)
 applicable to a family of the size involved.'.
TITLE IV--USHEALTH PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION
Subtitle A--USHealth Administration
SEC. 401. ESTABLISHMENT OF USHEALTH ADMINISTRATION AS A SEPARATE, INDEPENDENT
AGENCY; RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE AGENCY.
 Title XVIII of the Social Security Act is amended by inserting after part C,
 as inserted by section 301 of this Act, the following new part:
`Part D--USHealth Administration
`USHEALTH ADMINISTRATION
 `SEC. 1851. There is hereby established, as an independent agency in the
 executive branch of the Government, a USHealth Administration (in this
 part referred to as the `Administration'). It shall be the duty of the
 Administration to administer the USHealth Program under this title. In this
 title, the term `USHealth Program' means the program under this title,
 and includes part B of title XI and any other provision of this Act or
 other Act that relates directly to the program under this title.
`USHEALTH BOARD; USHEALTH ADMINISTRATOR; OTHER OFFICERS
 `SEC. 1852. (a) USHEALTH BOARD- (1)(A) The Administration shall be governed
 by a USHealth Board (in this part referred to as the `Board'). The Board
 shall be composed of 7 members appointed by the President, by and with
 the advice and consent of the Senate. The members shall be chosen, on
 the basis of their integrity, impartiality, and good judgment, from among
 individuals who, by reason of their education, experience, and attainments,
 are exceptionally qualified to perform the duties of members of the Board.
 `(B)(i) Except as provided in clauses (ii) and (iii), members of the
 Board shall be appointed for terms of 6 years. A member of the Board may
 be removed only pursuant to a finding by the President of neglect of duty
 or malfeasance in office. The President shall transmit any such finding to
 the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Majority Leader of the
 Senate not later than 5 days after the date on which such finding is made.
 `(ii) Of the members first appointed, two shall be appointed for a term
 of 2 years, two shall be appointed for a term of 4 years, and three
 shall be appointed for a term of 6 years, as designated by the President
 at the time of appointment. Members shall first be appointed not later
 than 6 months after the date of the enactment of the USHealth Program
 Act of 1991. In making such appointments, the President shall consider
 recommendations made by the chairmen of the Committee on Ways and Means,
 the Committee on Energy and Commerce, the permanent Select Committee on
 Aging, and the Select Committee on Children, Youth, and Families of the
 House of Representatives and recommendations made by the chairmen of the
 Committee on Finance, the Committee on Labor and Human Resources, and the
 Special Committee on Aging of the Senate.
 `(iii) The President may not nominate an individual for appointment to a term
 of office as member of the Board before the commencement of the President's
 term of office in which the member's term of office commences. Any member
 appointed to a term of office after the commencement of such term may serve
 under such appointment only for the remainder of such term. A member may,
 at the request of the President, serve for not more than one year after
 the expiration of his or her term until his or her successor has taken
 office. A member of the Board may be appointed for additional terms.
 `(C) Not more than 4 members of the Board shall be of the same political
 party.
 `(D) A member of the Board may not, during his or her term as member,
 otherwise serve as an officer or employee of any government. If any member
 of the Board becomes an officer or employee of any government, such member
 may continue as a member of the Board for not longer than the 30-day period
 beginning on the date such member becomes such an officer or employee.
 `(E) Two members of the Board shall constitute a quorum, except that one
 member may hold hearings.
 `(F) A member of the Board shall be designated from time to time by the
 President to serve as Chairman of the Board.
 `(G) The Board shall meet at the call of the Chairman or two members of
 the Board.
 `(2) Each member of the Board shall be compensated at the rate provided
 for level II of the Executive Schedule.
 `(3) The Board shall--
 `(A) govern by regulation the USHealth Program,
 `(B) appoint a USHealth Administrator, as described in subsection (b),
 to act as the chief operating officer of the Administration responsible
 for administering the USHealth Program,
 `(C) constitute the Board of Trustees of the USHealth Program Trust Fund,
 with the Chairman of the Board serving as Chairman of such Board of Trustees,
 `(D) make annual budgetary recommendations relating to the Administration,
 including costs of the USHealth Program, and defend such recommendations
 before the appropriate committees of each House of the Congress,
 `(E) make recommendations to the Congress and the President as to the most
 effective methods of providing for the health care of permanent residents
 in the United States and as to legislation and matters of administrative
 policy concerning the USHealth Program,
 `(F) provide the Congress and the President with the ongoing actuarial
 and other analysis undertaken by the Administration with respect to the
 USHealth Program and any other information relating to such programs,
 `(G) conduct policy analysis and research relating to the USHealth
 Program, and
 `(H) conduct an education program for health care consumers and providers
 on the importance of holding down health care costs.
 `(4)(A) The Board may prescribe such rules and regulations as the Board
 determines necessary or appropriate to carry out the functions of the
 Administration. The regulations prescribed by the Board shall be subject
 to the rulemaking procedures established under section 553 of title 5,
 United States Code.
 `(B) The Board may establish, alter, consolidate, or discontinue such
 organizational units or components within the Administration as the Board
 considers necessary or appropriate to carry out its functions, except that
 this subparagraph shall not apply with respect to any unit, component,
 or position provided for by this title.
 `(C) The Board may, with respect to the administration of the USHealth
 Program assign duties, and delegate, or authorize successive redelegations
 of, authority to act and to render decisions, to such officers and employees
 as the Board may find necessary. Within the limitations of such delegations,
 redelegations, or assignments, all official acts and decisions of such
 officers and employees shall have the same force and effect as though
 performed or rendered by the Board.
 `(b) USHEALTH ADMINISTRATOR- (1) There shall be in the Administration a
 USHealth Administrator (in this part referred to as the `Administrator')
 who shall be appointed by the USHealth Board.
 `(2)(A) The Administrator shall be appointed for a term of 5 years. An
 individual appointed to a term of office as Administrator after the
 commencement of such term may serve under such appointment only for the
 remainder of such term. An individual may, at the request of the Chairman
 of the Board, serve as Administrator after the expiration of his or her
 term for not more than one year until his or her successor has taken
 office. An individual may be appointed as Administrator for additional terms.
 `(B) An individual may be removed from the office of Administrator before
 completion of his or her term only for cause found by the Board.
 `(3) The Administrator shall be compensated at the rate provided for level
 II of the Executive Schedule.
 `(4) The Administrator shall--
 `(A) constitute the chief operating officer of the Administration,
 responsible for administering, in accordance with applicable statutes and
 regulations, the USHealth Program,
 `(B) establish and maintain an efficient and effective operational structure
 for the Administration,
 `(C) devise and implement long-term plans to promote and maintain the
 effective implementation of the USHealth Program,
 `(D) make annual budgetary recommendations of the Administration for the
 ongoing administrative costs of the Administration and the program costs
 of the USHealth Program and defend such recommendations before the Board
 and before the appropriate Committees of each House of the Congress,
 `(E) advise the Board and the Congress on the effect on the administration
 of the Program of proposed legislative changes in the Program,
 `(F) serve as Secretary of the Board of Trustees of the USHealth Program
 Trust Fund, and
 `(G) report in December of each year to the Board for transmittal to the
 Congress concerning the administrative endeavors and accomplishments of
 the Administration.
Any reference to the Board in this title or any other provision of law in
connection with the exercise of a function of the Board which is delegated
to the Administrator pursuant to this section shall be considered a reference
to the Administrator.
 `(c) DEPUTY USHEALTH ADMINISTRATOR- (1) There shall be in the Office of the
 Administrator a Deputy USHealth Administrator (in this part referred to
 as the `Deputy Administrator'), who shall be appointed by the Board. The
 Deputy Administrator shall be appointed for a term coextensive with the
 term of the Administrator. An individual may be removed from the office of
 Deputy Administrator before completion of his or her term only for cause
 found by the Board.
 `(2) The Deputy Administrator shall be compensated at the rate provided
 for level III of the Executive Schedule.
 `(3) The Deputy Administrator shall perform such duties and exercise
 such powers as the Administrator shall from time to time assign or
 delegate. The Deputy Administrator shall be Acting Health Administrator
 during the absence or disability of the Administrator and, unless the
 Board designates another officer of the Government, in the event of a
 vacancy in the office of Administrator.
 `(d) GENERAL COUNSEL- (1) There shall be in the Administration a General
 Counsel, who shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the
 Board. The General Counsel shall be the principal legal officer in the
 Administration.
 `(2) The General Counsel shall be compensated at the rate provided for
 level IV of the Executive Schedule.
 `(e) INSPECTOR GENERAL- (1) There shall be in the Administration an Office
 of the Inspector General. Such Office shall be headed by an Inspector
 General appointed in accordance with the Inspector General Act of 1978.
 `(2) The Inspector General shall be compensated at the rate provided for
 level IV of the Executive Schedule.
 `(f) USHEALTH OMBUDSMAN- (1) There shall be in the Administration an
 Office of the USHealth Ombudsman, to be headed by a USHealth Ombudsman
 (in this part referred to as the `Ombudsman') appointed by the Board.
 `(2)(A) The Ombudsman shall be appointed for a term of 5 years. An individual
 appointed to a term of office as Ombudsman after the commencement of such
 term may serve under such appointment only for the remainder of such
 term. An individual may, at the request of the Chairman of the Board,
 serve as Ombudsman after the expiration of his or her term for not more
 than one year until his or her successor has taken office. An individual
 may be appointed as Ombudsman for additional terms.
 `(B) An individual may be removed from the office of Ombudsman before
 completion of his or her term only for cause found by the Board.
 `(3) The Ombudsman shall be compensated at the rate provided for level V
 of the Executive Schedule.
 `(4) The duties of the Ombudsman are--
 `(A) to represent within the Administration's decisionmaking process the
 interests and concerns of beneficiaries under the USHealth Program;
 `(B) to review the Administration's policies and procedures for possible
 adverse effects on such beneficiaries;
 `(C) to recommend within the Administration's decisionmaking process
 changes in policies which have caused problems for such beneficiaries;
 `(D) to help resolve the problems under the USHealth Program of individual
 beneficiaries in unusual or difficult circumstances as determined by the
 Administrator; and
 `(E) to represent within the Administration's decisionmaking process
 the views of beneficiaries in the design of forms and the issuance of
 instructions.
 `(5) The Board shall assure that the Office of the USHealth Ombudsman has
 staff sufficient to enable the Ombudsman to efficiently carry out his
 or her duties. Such staff shall be located in the regional offices and
 central office of the Administration.
 `(6) The annual report of the Board under section 1854 shall include a
 description of the activities of the Ombudsman.
`ADMINISTRATIVE DUTIES OF THE USHEALTH BOARD
 `SEC. 1853. (a) PERSONNEL- (1) The Board shall appoint such additional
 officers and employees as it considers necessary to carry out its
 functions. Except as otherwise provided in any other provision of law,
 such officers and employees shall be appointed, and their compensation
 shall be fixed, in accordance with title 5, United States Code.
 `(2) The Board may procure the services of experts and consultants in
 accordance with the provisions of section 3109 of title 5, United States
 Code.
 `(3) Notwithstanding any requirements of section 3133 of title 5, United
 States Code, the Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall
 authorize for the Administration a total number of Senior Executive Service
 positions which is greater than the number of such positions authorized
 in the Health Care Financing Administration in the Department of Health
 and Human Services as of immediately before the date of the enactment of
 the USHealth Program Act of 1991, to the extent that the greater number
 of such authorized positions is specified in the comprehensive work force
 plan as established and revised by the Board under subsection (b)(1). The
 total number of such positions authorized for the Administration pursuant
 to such section 3133 shall not at any time be less than the number of such
 authorized positions as of immediately before such date.
 `(4) In addition to the positions of the Administration in the Executive
 Schedule specified in section 1852, the Administration is authorized 10
 additional positions at level IV of the Executive Schedule and 10 additional
 positions at level V of the Executive Schedule.
 `(5) All authority and functions of the Office of Personnel Management
 under section 4703 of title 5, United States Code (relating to demonstration
 projects), to the extent such section relates to personnel or positions in
 the Administration, shall be exercised exclusively by the Board. The Board
 shall report annually to the Committee on Ways and Means, the Committee on
 Energy and Commerce, the permanent Select Committee on Aging, and the Select
 Committee on Children, Youth, and Families of the House of Representatives
 and the Committee on Finance, the Committee on Labor and Human Resources,
 and the Special Committee on Aging of the Senate on the demonstration
 projects undertaken by the Board pursuant to this paragraph.
 `(b) BUDGETARY MATTER- (1) Appropriations requests for staffing and personnel
 of the Administration shall be based upon a comprehensive work force plan,
 which shall be established and revised from time to time by the Board. The
 entire amount of appropriations provided for the administrative costs of
 the Administration shall be apportioned in the time period provided in
 title 31, United States Code, for apportionment and shall be apportioned
 for the entire period of availability without restriction or deduction by
 the apportioning officer or employee of the Office of Management and Budget
 or any other entity within the executive branch of the Federal Government,
 except as otherwise provided in this subsection.
 `(2) The report submitted pursuant to section 1854 shall include a section
 reflecting the use of budget authority provided to the Administration
 by quarters.
 `(3)(A) Authority of the Administration for automated data processing
 procurement and facilities construction shall be provided in the form of
 contract authority covering the total costs of such acquisitions, to be
 available until expended.
 `(B) Amounts necessary for the liquidation of contract authority provided
 pursuant to this paragraph are hereby made available from the USHealth
 Program Trust Fund to the extent that the Board, with the concurrence
 of the Secretary of the Treasury, determines that such amounts are not
 necessary to meet the current obligations for payments from the Trust Fund.
 `(C) Funds appropriated for the Administration to be available on a
 contingency basis shall be apportioned only upon the occurrence of the
 stipulated contingency, as determined by the Board and reported to each
 House of the Congress.
 `(c) SEAL OF OFFICE- The Board shall cause a seal of office to be made
 for the Administration of such design as the Board shall approve. Judicial
 notice shall be taken of such seal.
`REPORTS
 `SEC. 1854. The USHealth Administrator and the USHealth Board shall make
 full reports to Congress, within 120 days after the beginning of each
 regular session, of the administration of the functions with which they
 are charged under this title.'.
SEC. 402. TRANSFERS TO THE NEW USHEALTH ADMINISTRATION.
 (a) FUNCTIONS- There are transferred to the USHealth Administration all
 functions carried out by the Secretary of Health and Human Services with
 respect to the programs and activities the administration of which is
 vested in the Health Care Financing Administration. The USHealth Board
 shall allocate such functions in accordance with sections 1851, 1852,
 and 1853 of the Social Security Act (as amended by this Act).
 (b) PERSONNEL, ASSETS, ETC- (1) There are transferred from the Department
 of Health and Human Services to the USHealth Administration, for appropriate
 allocation by the USHealth Board in the USHealth Administration--
 (A) the personnel employed in connection with the functions transferred by
 this Act and the amendments made thereby, as considered appropriate by the
 Board in consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services, and
 (B) the assets, liabilities, contracts, property, records, and unexpended
 balance of appropriations, authorizations, allocations, and other funds
 employed, held, or used in connection with such functions, arising from
 such functions, or available, or to be made available, in connection with
 such functions.
 (2) Unexpended funds transferred pursuant to this subsection shall be
 used only for the purposes for which the funds were originally authorized
 and appropriated.
 (3) The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall terminate--
 (A) those positions in the Department of Health and Human Services
 placed in level IV of the Executive Schedule (or equivalent positions),
 other than positions specifically required under section 5315 of title 5,
 United States Code, or any other provision of law, attributable to the
 Health Care Financing Administration, and
 (B) those positions in such Department placed in level V of the Executive
 Schedule (or equivalent positions), other than positions specifically
 required under section 5316 of such title or any other provision of law,
 attributable to the Health Care Financing Administration.
 (c) ABOLISHMENT OF HEALTH CARE FINANCING ADMINISTRATION IN THE DEPARTMENT OF
 HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES- Effective upon the appointment of all initial
 members of the USHealth Board pursuant to section 1852 of the Social
 Security Act (as amended by this Act)--
 (1) the position of Administrator of the Health Care Financing Administration
 in the Department of Health and Human Services is abolished, and
 (2) section 1117 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1317) is repealed.
SEC. 403. TRANSITIONAL RULES.
 (a) INTERIM AUTHORITY FOR APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION- After 6 months
 after the date of the enactment of this Act--
 (1) any of the officers provided for in section 1852 of the Social Security
 Act (as amended by this Act) may be nominated and appointed, as provided
 in such section, and
 (2) the USHealth Board, upon nomination and appointment of all of the
 members thereof, may prescribe regulations providing for the orderly
 transfer of proceedings before the Secretary of Health and Human Services
 to the USHealth Board.
Funds available to any official or component of the Department of Health and
Human Services, functions of which are transferred to the USHealth Board or
the USHealth Administration by this Act, may be used to pay the compensation
and expenses of any officer appointed pursuant to this section until such
time as funds for that purpose are otherwise available.
 (b) CONTINUATION OF ORDERS, DETERMINATIONS, RULES, REGULATIONS, ETC- All
 orders, determinations, rules, regulations, permits, contracts, collective
 bargaining agreements, recognitions of labor organizations, certificates,
 licenses, and privileges--
 (1) which have been issued, made, promulgated, granted, or allowed to
 become effective, in the exercise of functions (A) which were exercised
 by the Secretary of Health and Human Services (or his delegate), and (B)
 which relate to functions which, by reason of this Act, the amendments
 made thereby, and regulations prescribed thereunder, are vested in the
 USHealth Board, and
 (2) which are in effect immediately before January 1 of the 2nd year
 beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act,
shall (to the extent that they relate to functions described in paragraph
(1)(B)) continue in effect according to their terms until modified, terminated,
suspended, set aside, or repealed by such Board.
 (c) CONTINUATION OF PROCEEDINGS- The provisions of this Act (including the
 amendments made thereby) shall not affect any proceeding pending before
 the Secretary of Health and Human Services immediately before January 1
 of the third year beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act
 with respect to functions vested (by reason of this Act, the amendments
 made thereby, and regulations prescribed thereunder) in the USHealth
 Board, except that such proceedings, to the extent that they relate to
 such functions, shall continue before such Board. Orders shall be issued
 under any such proceeding, appeals taken therefrom, and payments shall
 be made pursuant to such orders, in like manner as if this Act had not
 been enacted, and orders issued in any such proceeding shall continue in
 effect until modified, terminated, superseded, or repealed by such Board,
 by a court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of law.
 (d) CONTINUATION OF SUITS- Except as provided in this subsection--
 (1) the provisions of this Act shall not affect suits commenced before
 January 1 of the first year beginning after the date of the enactment of
 this Act; and
 (2) in all such suits proceedings shall be had, appeals taken, and judgments
 rendered, in the same manner and effect as if this Act had not been enacted.
No cause of action, and no suit, action, or other proceeding commenced by or
against any officer in his official capacity as an officer of the Department
of Health and Human Services, shall abate by reason of the enactment of this
Act. Causes of action, suits, actions, or other proceedings may be asserted
by or against the United States and the Health Care Financing Administration,
or such official of such Administration as may be appropriate, and, in any
litigation pending immediately before January 1 of the first year beginning
after the date of the enactment of this Act, the court may at any time, on
its own motion or that of a party, enter an order which will give effect to
the provisions of this subsection (including, where appropriate, an order
for substitution of parties).
 (e) CONTINUATION OF PENALTIES- This Act shall not have the effect of
 releasing or extinguishing any criminal prosecution, penalty, forfeiture,
 or liability incurred as a result of any function which (by reason of this
 Act, the amendments made thereby, and regulations prescribed thereunder)
 is vested in the USHealth Board.
 (f) JUDICIAL REVIEW- Orders and actions of the USHealth Board in the exercise
 of functions vested in such Board under this Act (and the amendments made
 thereby) shall be subject to judicial review to the same extent and in
 the same manner as if such orders had been made and such actions had been
 taken by the Secretary of Health and Human Services in the exercise of
 such functions immediately before January 1 of the first year beginning
 after the date of the enactment of this Act. Any statutory requirements
 relating to notice, hearings, action upon the record, or administrative
 review that apply to any function so vested in such Board shall continue
 to apply to the exercise of such function by such Board.
 (g) EXERCISE OF FUNCTIONS- In the exercise of the functions vested in the
 USHealth Board under this Act, the amendments made thereby, and regulations
 prescribed thereunder, such Board shall have the same authority as that
 vested in the Secretary of Health and Human Services with respect to
 the exercise of such functions immediately preceding the vesting of such
 functions in such Board, and actions of such Board shall have the same
 force and effect as when exercised by such Secretary.
 (h) OPERATION OF TRANSITIONAL RULES IN THE EVENT OF INTERIM AUTHORITY IN
 THE USHEALTH ADMINISTRATOR- For purposes of this section, in any case in
 which the powers and duties to be transferred to the USHealth Board are
 transferred to the USHealth Administrator (or acting USHealth Administrator)
 in the Department of Health and Human Services for an interim period pursuant
 to section 401(d), the preceding provisions of this section shall apply
 with respect to the transfer of such powers and duties to and from such
 Administrator (or acting Administrator) pursuant to such section in the
 same manner and to the same extent as they would have applied to a direct
 transfer from the Secretary of Health and Human Services to the USHealth
 Board if all initial appointments to such Board had been made.
SEC. 404. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT AND RELATED
PROVISIONS.
 (a) REFERENCES TO SECRETARY- (1) Sections 1121, 1122, 1123, 1124, 1126,
 1128, 1128A, part B of title XI and title XVIII of the Social Security
 Act are each amended--
 (A) by striking `Secretary of Health and Human Services' each place it
 appears and inserting `USHealth Board',
 (B) by striking `Department of Health and Human Services' each place it
 appears and inserting `USHealth Administration',
 (C) by striking, each place it appears, `Department' (but only if it is
 not immediately succeeded by the words `of Health and Human Services',
 and only if it is used in reference to the Department of Health and Human
 Services) and inserting `USHealth Administration', and
 (D) by striking, each place it appears, each of the following words (but,
 in the case of any such word only if such word refers to the Secretary of
 Health and Human Services): `Secretary', `Secretary's', `his', `him', and
 `he', and inserting (in the case of the word `Secretary') `USHealth Board',
 (in the case of the word `Secretary's') `USHealth Board's', (in the case
 of the word `his') `USHealth Board's', (in the case of the word `him')
 `USHealth Board', and (in the case of the word `he') `USHealth Board'.
 (2) Section 1155 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1320c-4) is amended by inserting
 after `205(b)' the following: `, except that in applying such section any
 reference therein to the Secretary shall be considered a reference to the
 USHealth Board'.
 (3) Section 1872 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395ii) is amended by inserting
 after `title II' the following: `, except that, in applying such provisions
 with respect to this title, any reference therein to the Secretary shall
 be considered a reference to the USHealth Board'.
 (4) Sections 1862(d)(3), 1869(b)(1), and 1869(c) of such Act and the last
 sentence of section 1876(c)(5)(B) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395y(d)(3),
 1395ff(b)(1), 1395ff(c), 1395m(c)(5)(B)) are amended by inserting after
 `section 205(g)' the following: `, except that, in so applying such sections,
 any reference therein to the Secretary shall be considered a reference to
 the USHealth Board'.
 (b) COMPENSATION OF OFFICIALS- Title 5, United States Code, is amended--
 (1) by adding at the end of section 5313 the following new items:
 `Members, USHealth Board (7).
 `USHealth Administrator.';
 (2) by adding at the end of section 5314 the following new item:
 `Deputy USHealth Administrator.';
 (3) by adding at the end of section 5315 the following new items:
 `General Counsel, USHealth Administration.
 `Inspector General, USHealth Administration.
 `Additional officers, USHealth Administration (10).'; and
 (4) by adding at the end of section 5316 the following new items:
 `Ombudsman, USHealth Administration.
 `Additional officers, USHealth Administration (10).'.
 (c) INSPECTOR GENERAL PROVISIONS- The Inspector General Act of 1978 (5
 U.S.C. App.) is amended--
 (1) in section 2(1), by striking `and the Veterans' Administration' and
 inserting `the Veterans' Administration, and the USHealth Administration';
 (2) in section 9(a)(1), by striking `and' at the end of subparagraph (M),
 and by adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraph:
 `(O) of the USHealth Administration, the offices of the inspector general
 in the Health Care Financing Administration; and';
 (3) in section 11(1), by striking `or' after `Transportation' and inserting
 a comma, and by inserting after `Affairs,' the following: `or Chairman of
 the USHealth Board,'; and
 (4) in section 11(2), by striking `or' after `Transportation', and by
 inserting after `Veterans' Administration,' the following: `or the USHealth
 Administration,'.
SEC. 405. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
 (a) REFERENCES TO THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES- Whenever
 any reference is made in any provision of law (other than this Act or
 a provision of law amended by this Act), regulation, rule, record, or
 document to the Department of Health and Human Services with respect such
 Department's functions under the USHealth Program under title XVIII of
 the Social Security Act, such reference shall be considered a reference
 to the USHealth Administration.
 (b) REFERENCES TO THE SECRETARY OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES- Whenever any
 reference is made in any provision of law (other than this Act or a provision
 of law amended by this Act), regulation, rule, record, or document to the
 Secretary of Health and Human Services with respect to such Secretary's
 functions under the USHealth Program, such reference shall be considered
 a reference to the USHealth Board.
 (c) REFERENCES TO OTHER OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES- Whenever any reference is
 made in any provision of law (other than this Act or a provision of law
 amended by this Act), regulation, rule, record, or document to any other
 officer or employee of the Department of Health and Human Services with
 respect to such officer or employee's functions under the USHealth Program,
 such reference shall be considered a reference to the appropriate officer
 or employee of the USHealth Administration.
Subtitle B--Miscellaneous
SEC. 411. USE OF INTERMEDIARIES AND CARRIERS.
 (a) REPEAL OF INTERMEDIARY PROVISION- Section 1816 of the Social Security
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395h) is repealed.
 (b) CONFORMING CHANGES IN CARRIER PROVISIONS- Section 1842 of such Act
 (42 U.S.C. 1395u)--
 (1) is amended as follows:
 (A) in subsection (a)--
 (i) by striking `and with a view' and all that follows through `part A
 and under this part',
 (ii) by striking `is authorized to' and inserting `shall, to the maximum
 extent possible,',
 (iii) by striking `, including carriers with which agreements under section
 1816 are in effect,',
 (iv) in paragraph (1)(A), by striking `on a reasonable cost or reasonable
 charge basis (as may be applicable)', and
 (v) by adding at the end the following: `To the maximum extent practicable
 and consistent with the other requirements of this section, the USHealth
 Board shall use insurance companies as carriers under this section, and
 shall take appropriate steps to strengthen utilization review by carriers
 under this section to better control cost increases due to changes in
 billing practices, service delivery, and service intensity.';
 (B) in subsection (b)(3)--
 (i) by striking subparagraphs (A), (B), (F), (G), and (H),
 (ii) by inserting `and' at the end of subparagraph (D),
 (iii) by redesignating subparagraphs (C) through (E) as subparagraphs (A)
 through (C), and
 (iv) by striking all that follows the first sentence;
 (C) in subsection (b)--
 (i) by striking paragraph (4) and paragraphs (6) through (12), and
 (ii) by redesignating paragraph (5) as paragraph (4);
 (D) in subsection (f)--
 (i) by striking `-- (1)',
 (ii) by striking `; and' and inserting a period, and
 (iii) by striking paragraph (2); and
 (E) by striking subsections (g) through (o);
 (2) is redesignated as section 1816; and
 (3) is transferred and inserted in part A of title XVIII of such Act after
 section 1815.
 (c) PERMITTING STATES TO BE CARRIERS- Section 1816(f) of such Act, as
 redesignated under subsection (b), is amended by adding at the end the
 following: `Such term also includes a State.'.
 (d) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- (1)(A) Section 1128A(a)(2) of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 1320a-7a) is amended by striking `(A)' and all that follows through
 `1842(h)(1)' and inserting `section 1814(f)'.
 (B) Section 1153(d)(4) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1320c-2(d)(4)) is amended by
 striking `an intermediary' and all that follows through `1842' and inserting
 `carrier having a contract under section 1816'.
 (2) Section 1861(aa)(2) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x(aa)(2)) is amended by
 striking clause (ii) and redesignating clauses (iii) and (iv) as clauses
 (ii) and (iii), respectively.
 (3) Section 1866(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395cc(a)) is amended--
 (A) in paragraph (1), by inserting `and' at the end of subparagraph (L),
 by striking `, and' at the end of subparagraph (M) and inserting a period,
 and by striking subparagraph (N), and
 (B) in paragraph (2), by striking subparagraphs (A) and (C).
 (4) Section 1876 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395mm) is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a)(3), by striking `sections 1814(b) and 1833(a)'
 and inserting `section 1814',
 (B) in subsection (a)(4), by striking `sections 1816 and 1842' and inserting
 `section 1816', and
 (C) in subsection (g)(6)(A), by striking `section 1816(c)(2) and 1842(c)(2)'
 and inserting `section 1816(c)(2)'.
 (e) EFFECTIVE DATES- The amendments made by this section shall apply to
 items and services furnished on or after January 1 of the second year
 beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 412. ADDITIONAL ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS RELATING TO COVERED OUTPATIENT
DRUGS.
 (a) PARTICIPATING PHARMACIES; CIVIL MONEY PENALTIES-
 (1) PARTICIPATING PHARMACIES- Section 1816 of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395t), as redesignated by section 411(b)(2) of this Act, is amended--
 (A) in subsection (h)(1), by inserting before the period at the end of
 the second sentence the following: `, except that, with respect to a
 supplier of covered outpatient drugs, the term `participating supplier'
 means a participating pharmacy (as defined in subsection (o)(1))';
 (B) in subsection (h)(4), is amended by adding at the end the following:
 `In publishing directories under this paragraph, the USHealth Board shall
 provide for separate directories (wherever appropriate) for participating
 pharmacies.'; and
 (C) by inserting after subsection (n) the following new subsection:
 `(o)(1) For purposes of this section, the term `participating pharmacy'
 means, with respect to covered outpatient drugs dispensed on or after
 January 1 of the 2nd year beginning after the date of the enactment of this
 subsection, an entity which is authorized under a State law to dispense
 covered outpatient drugs and which has entered into an agreement with the
 USHealth Board, providing at least the following:
 `(A) The entity agrees to accept payment under this part on an
 assignment-related basis for all covered outpatient drugs dispensed to
 an individual entitled to benefits under this part (in this subsection
 referred to as a `USHealth beneficiary') during a year after--
 `(i) the USHealth Board has notified the entity, through the electronic
 system described in paragraph (4); or
 `(ii) in the absence of such a system, the entity is otherwise notified
 that the Board has determined,
that the individual has met the applicable deductible under section 1813A(b)
for the year.
 `(B) The entity agrees--
 `(i) not to refuse to dispense covered outpatient drugs stocked by the
 entity to any USHealth beneficiary; and
 `(ii) not to charge USHealth beneficiaries (regardless of whether or
 not the beneficiaries are enrolled under a prepaid health plan or with
 eligible organization under section 1876) more for such drugs than the
 amount it charges to the general public (as determined by the USHealth
 Board in regulations).
 `(C) The entity agrees to keep patient records (including records on
 expenses) for all covered outpatient drugs dispensed to all USHealth
 beneficiaries.
 `(D) The entity agrees to submit information (in a manner specified by
 the Board to be necessary to administer this title) on all purchases of
 covered outpatient drugs dispensed to USHealth beneficiaries.
 `(E) The entity agrees--
 `(i) to offer to counsel, or to offer to provide information (consistent
 with State law respecting the provision of such information) to, each
 USHealth beneficiary on the appropriate use of a drug to be dispensed and
 whether there are potential interactions between the drug and other drugs
 dispensed to the beneficiary; and
 `(ii) to advise the beneficiary on the availability (consistent with
 State laws respecting substitution of drugs) of therapeutically equivalent
 covered outpatient drugs.
 `(F) The entity agrees to provide the information requested by the USHealth
 Board in surveys under section 1814B(d)(3)(C)(ii).
Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed as requiring a pharmacy operated
by an eligible organization (described in section 1876(b)) or an organization
described in section 1814A(a)(1)(A) for the exclusive benefit of its members
to dispense covered outpatient drugs to individuals who are not members of
the organization.
 `(2) The USHealth Board shall provide to each participating pharmacy--
 `(A) a distinctive emblem (suitable for display to the public) indicating
 that the pharmacy is a participating pharmacy; and
 `(B) upon request, such electronic equipment and technical assistance
 (other than the costs of obtaining, maintaining, or expanding telephone
 service) as the Board determines may be necessary for the pharmacy to
 submit claims using the electronic system established under paragraph (4).
 `(3) The USHealth Board shall provide for periodic audits of participating
 pharmacies to assure--
 `(A) compliance with the requirements for participation under this title; and
 `(B) the accuracy of information submitted by the pharmacies under this
 title.
 `(4) The USHealth Board shall establish, by not later than January 1 of
 the 2nd year beginning after the date of the enactment of this subsection,
 a point-of-sale electronic system for use by carriers and participating
 pharmacies in the submission of information respecting covered outpatient
 drugs dispensed to USHealth beneficiaries under this part.
 `(5) Notwithstanding subsection (b)(3)(B), payment for covered outpatient
 drugs may be made on the basis of an assignment described in clause (ii)
 of that subsection only to a participating pharmacy.'.
 (2) CIVIL MONEY PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF PARTICIPATION AGREEMENT, FOR
 EXCESSIVE CHARGES FOR NONPARTICIPATING PHARMACIES AND FOR FAILURE TO PROVIDE
 SURVEY INFORMATION- Section 1128A(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1320a-7a(a))
 is amended--
 (A) by striking `or' at the end of paragraph (1);
 (B) in paragraph (2)(C), by striking `1842(h)(1)' and inserting `1816(h)(1)
 or to be a participating pharmacy under section 1816(o)';
 (C) by striking `, or' at the end of paragraph (2) and inserting a semicolon;
 (D) by adding `or' at the end of paragraph (3); and
 (E) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following new paragraph:
 `(4) in the case of a participating or nonparticipating pharmacy (as
 defined for purposes of part A of title XVIII)--
 `(A) presents or causes to be presented to any person a request for
 payment for covered outpatient drugs dispensed to an individual entitled
 to benefits under part A of title XVIII and for which the amount charged
 by the pharmacy is greater than the amount the pharmacy charges the general
 public (as determined by the Board in regulations), or
 `(B) fails to provide the information requested by the USHealth Board in
 a survey under section 1814B(d)(3)(C)(ii);'.
 (b) USE OF CARRIERS AND OTHER ENTITIES IN ADMINISTRATION-
 (1) AUTHORIZING USE OF OTHER ENTITIES IN ELECTRONIC CLAIMS SYSTEM-
 Section 1816(f) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395u(f)), as redesignated by
 section 411(b)(2) of this Act, is amended--
 (A) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (1);
 (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (2) and inserting `;
 and'; and
 (C) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(3) with respect to implementation and operation (and related functions)
 of the electronic system established under subsection (o)(4), a voluntary
 association, corporation, partnership, or other nongovernmental organization,
 which the USHealth Board determines to be qualified to conduct such
 activities.'.
 (2) ADDITIONAL FUNCTIONS OF CARRIERS- Section 1816(b)(3) of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395u(b)(3)), as redesignated by section 411(b)(2) of this Act,
 is amended--
 (A) by striking `and' at the end of subparagraph (H);
 (B) by adding `and' at the end of subparagraph (L);
 (C) by redesignating subparagraph (L) as subparagraph (I); and
 (D) by inserting after subparagraph (I) (as so redesignated) the following
 new subparagraphs:
 `(J) if it makes determinations or payments with respect to covered
 outpatient drugs, will--
 `(i) receive information transmitted under the electronic system established
 under subsection (o)(4), and
 `(ii) respond to requests by participating pharmacies (and individuals
 entitled to benefits under this part) as to whether or not such an individual
 has met the deductible established under section 1813A(b) for a year; and
 `(K) will enter into such contracts with organizations described in
 subsection (f)(3) as the USHealth Board determines may be necessary
 to implement and operate (and for related functions with respect to)
 the electronic system established under subsection (o)(4) for covered
 outpatient drugs under this part;'.
 (3) SPECIAL CONTRACT PROVISIONS FOR ELECTRONIC CLAIMS SYSTEM-
 (A) PAYMENT ON OTHER THAN A COST BASIS- Section 1816(c)(1)(A) of such Act
 (42 U.S.C. 1395u(c)(1)(A)), as redesignated by section 411(b)(2) of this
 Act, is amended--
 (i) by inserting `(i)' after `(c)(1)(A)';
 (ii) in the first sentence, by inserting `, except as provided in clause
 (ii),' after `under this part, and'; and
 (iii) by adding at the end the following new clause:
 `(ii) To the extent that a contract under this section provides for
 implementation and operation (and related functions) of the electronic
 system established under subsection (o)(4) for covered outpatient drugs,
 the USHealth Board may provide for payment for such activities based on
 any method of payment determined by the Board to be appropriate.'.
 (B) APPLICATION OF DIFFERENT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS- The USHealth Board,
 before entering into contracts under section 1816 of the Social Security Act
 with respect to the implementation and operation (and related functions)
 of the electronic system for covered outpatient drugs, shall establish
 standards with respect to performance with respect to such activities. The
 provisions of section 1153(e)(2) and paragraphs (1) and (2) of section
 1153(h) of such Act shall apply to such activities in the same manner as
 they apply to contracts with peer review organizations, instead of the
 requirements of the last 2 sentences of section 1816(b)(2) of such Act.
 (C) USE OF REGIONAL CARRIERS- Section 1816(b)(2)(A) of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395u(b)(2)(A)), as redesignated by section 411(b)(2) of this Act,
 is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: `With respect to
 activities relating to implementation and operation (and related functions)
 of the electronic system established under subsection (o)(4), the USHealth
 Board may enter into contracts with carriers under this section to perform
 such activities on a regional basis.'.
 (4) BATCH PROMPT PROCESSING OF CLAIMS- Section 1816(c) of such Act
 (42 U.S.C. 1395u(c)), as redesignated by section 411(b)(2) of this Act,
 is amended--
 (A) in paragraphs (2)(A) and (3)(A), by striking `Each' and inserting
 `Except as provided in paragraph (3), each';
 (B) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(4)(A) Each contract under this section which provides for the disbursement
 of funds, as described in subsection (a)(1)(B), with respect to claims for
 payment for covered outpatient drugs shall provide for a payment cycle
 under which each carrier will, on a monthly basis, make a payment with
 respect to all claims which were received and approved for payment in the
 period since the most recent date on which such a payment was made with
 respect to the participating pharmacy or individual submitting the claim.
 `(B) If payment is not issued, mailed, or otherwise transmitted within 5
 days of when such a payment is required to be made under subparagraph (A),
 interest shall be paid at the rate used for purposes of section 3902(a) of
 title 31, United States Code (relating to interest penalties for failure
 to make prompt payments) for the period beginning on the day after such
 5-day period and ending on the date on which payment is made.'.
 (5) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by paragraph (5) shall take effect
 on January 1 of the 2nd year beginning after the date of the enactment of
 this Act.
 (c) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- The first sentence of section 1866(a)(2)(A)
 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395cc(a)(2)(A)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `1833(b),' and inserting `1814A(b), 1814(B)(d),'; and
 (2) by inserting `and in the case of covered outpatient drugs, 20 percent
 of the lesser of the actual charges for the drugs or the payment limit
 (established under section 1814B(d)(3))' after `established by the
 Secretary'.
 (d) PRESCRIPTION DRUG PAYMENT REVIEW COMMISSION- Title XVIII of such Act
 is amended by redesignating section 1845 as section 1820B and inserting
 after such section the following new section:
`PRESCRIPTION DRUG PAYMENT REVIEW COMMISSION
 `SEC. 1820C. (a)(1) The Director of the Congressional Office of Technology
 Assessment (in this section referred to as the `Director' and the `Office',
 respectively) shall provide for the appointment of a Prescription Drug
 Payment Review Commission (in this section referred to as the `Commission'),
 to be composed of individuals with expertise in the provision and financing
 of covered outpatient drugs appointed by the Director (without regard to
 the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in
 the competitive service).
 `(2) The Commission shall consist of 11 individuals. Members of the
 Commission shall first be appointed by no later than January 1 of the
 first year beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act, for a
 term of 3 years, except that the Director may provide initially for such
 shorter terms as will insure that (on a continuing basis) the terms of no
 more than 4 members expire in any one year.
 `(3) The membership of the Commission shall include recognized experts in
 the fields of health care economics, medicine, pharmacology, pharmacy,
 and prescription drug reimbursement, as well as at least one individual
 who is a USHealth beneficiary.
 `(b)(1) The Commission shall submit to Congress an annual report no later
 than May 1 of each year, beginning with the 2nd year beginning after the
 date of the enactment of this section, concerning methods of determining
 payment for covered outpatient drugs under this part.
 `(2) Such report, in the 3rd year beginning after the date of the enactment
 of this section and thereafter, shall include, with respect to the previous
 year, information on--
 `(A) increases in manufacturers' prices for covered outpatient drugs and
 in charges of pharmacists for covered outpatient drugs,
 `(B) the level of utilization of covered outpatient drugs by USHealth
 beneficiaries, and
 `(C) administrative costs relating to covered outpatient drugs.
 `(c) Section 1820B(c)(1) shall apply to the Commission in the same manner
 as it applies to the Physician Payment Review Commission.
 `(d) There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary
 to carry out the provisions of this section. Such sums shall be payable
 from the USHealth Program Trust Fund.'.
 (e) ADDITIONAL STUDIES-
 (1) HHS- The Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this section
 referred to as the `Secretary', or, in the case of the studies described in
 subparagraphs (C) and (D), the USHealth Board) shall conduct the following
 studies, and report to Congress on the results of each such study by the
 following dates:
 (A) A study of the possibility of including drugs which have not yet been
 approved under section 505 or 507 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
 and biological products which have not been licensed under section 351 of
 the Public Health Service Act but which are commonly used in the treatment
 of cancer or in immunosuppressive therapy and other experimental drugs and
 biological products as covered outpatient drugs under the USHealth Program,
 for which a report shall be made by January 1, 1993. The study under this
 subparagraph shall be conducted in consultation with an advisory board of
 consumers, experts in the fields of cancer chemotherapy and immunosuppressive
 therapy, representatives of pharmaceutical manufacturers, and such other
 individuals as the Secretary may select.
 (B) A study to evaluate the potential to use mail service pharmacies to
 reduce costs to the USHealth Program and to USHealth beneficiaries, for
 which a report shall be made by January 1, 1993.
 (C) A study of methods to improve utilization review of covered outpatient
 drugs, for which a report shall be made by January 1, 1995.
 (D) A longitudinal study on the use of outpatient prescription drugs by
 USHealth beneficiaries with respect to medical necessity, potential for
 adverse drug interactions, cost (including whether lower cost drugs could
 have been used), and patient stockpiling or wastage, for which a report
 shall be made by January 1, 1995.
 (2) GAO- The Comptroller General shall conduct the following studies,
 and report to Congress on the results of each such study by not later than
 May 1, 1994:
 (A) A study comparing average wholesale prices with actual pharmacy
 acquisition costs by type of pharmacy.
 (B) A study to determine the overhead costs of retail pharmacies.
 (C) A study of the discounts given by pharmacies to other third-party
 insurers.
Pharmacies which fail to provide the Comptroller General with reasonable
access to necessary records to carry out the studies under this paragraph
are subject to exclusion from the USHealth Program under section 1128(a)
of the Social Security Act.
 (f) DEVELOPMENT OF STANDARD USHEALTH CLAIMS FORM-
 (1) The USHealth Board shall develop, in consultation with representatives
 of pharmacies and other interested individuals, a standard claims form
 (and a standard electronic claims format) to be used in requests for
 payment for covered outpatient drugs under the USHealth Program and other
 third-party payors.
 (2) Not later than January 1 of the first year beginning after the date
 of the enactment of this Act, the Board shall distribute official sample
 copies of the format developed under paragraph (1) to pharmacies and other
 interested parties and by not later than such date shall distribute official
 sample copies of the form developed under paragraph (1) to pharmacies and
 other interested parties.
SEC. 413. PROVISIONS RELATING TO INTRAVENOUS DRUG THERAPY SERVICES.
 (a) PRO PRIOR APPROVAL REQUIRED- Section 1154(a) of the Social Security
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1320c-3(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following
 new paragraph:
 `(17) The organization shall perform the review described in paragraph
 (1) with respect to home intravenous drug therapy services (as defined in
 section 1861(oo)(1)) initiated before January 1 of the 5th year beginning
 after the date of the enactment of this paragraph, within 1 working day of
 the date of the organization's receipt of a request for such review. The
 USHealth Board shall establish criteria to be used by such an organization
 in conducting reviews with respect to the appropriateness of home intravenous
 drug therapy services under this paragraph.'.
 (b) Certification of Home Intravenous Drug Therapy Providers; Intermediate
 Sanctions for Noncompliance-
 (1) TREATMENT AS PROVIDER OF SERVICES- Section 1861(u) of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395x(u)) is amended by inserting `home intravenous drug therapy
 provider,' after `hospice program,'.
 (2) CONSULTATION WITH STATE AGENCIES AND OTHER ORGANIZATIONS- Section
 1863 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395z) is amended by striking `and (dd)(2)'
 and inserting `(dd)(2), and (oo)(3)'.
 (3) USE OF STATE AGENCIES IN DETERMINING COMPLIANCE- Section 1864(a)
 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395aa(a)) is amended--
 (A) in the first sentence, by inserting `or a home intravenous drug therapy
 provider,' after `hospice program', and
 (B) in the second sentence, by striking `or hospice program' and inserting
 `hospice program, or home intravenous drug therapy provider'.
 (4) APPLICATION OF INTERMEDIATE SANCTIONS- Section 1846 of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395w-2) is amended--
 (A) in the heading, by adding `AND FOR QUALIFIED HOME INTRAVENOUS DRUG
 THERAPY PROVIDERS' at the end;
 (B) in subsection (a), by inserting `or that a qualified home intravenous
 drug therapy provider that is certified for participation under this title
 no longer substantially meets the requirements of section 1861(oo)(3)'
 after `under this part';
 (C) in subsection (b)(2)(A)(iv), by inserting `or home intravenous drug
 therapy services' after `clinical diagnostic laboratory tests'; and
 (D) by redesignating such section as section 1820D and by inserting it
 after section 1820C (as inserted by section 413(d) of this Act).
 (f) USE OF REGIONAL CARRIERS IN ADMINISTRATION OF BENEFIT- Section 1816 of
 such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395h), as redesignated by section 411(b)(2) of this
 Act, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection:
 `(k) With respect to carrying out functions relating to payment for home
 intravenous drug therapy services and covered home IV drugs, the USHealth
 Board may enter into contracts with agencies or organizations under this
 section to perform such functions on a regional basis.'.
SEC. 414. CHANGES IN HMO COVERAGE AND PAYMENT.
 (a) INCREASING PAYMENT TO 100 Percent of AAPCC-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Subsection (a)(1)(C) of section 1876 of the Social Security
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395mm) is amended by striking `95 percent' and inserting
 `100 percent'.
 (2) POTENTIAL ADJUSTMENT IN RATE OF INCREASE WHERE INADEQUATE DATA-
 Such subsection is further amended by adding at the end the following:
 `If the USHealth Board determines that there is no longer sufficient data
 to adequately compute such an adjusted average per capita cost for a class,
 the Board shall estimate such an amount in a manner that is consistent
 with the weighted average of the adjusted average per capita costs for all
 the classes changing at the same rate as the applicable adjustment change
 described in section 1887.'.
 (b) ADJUSTMENT OF AAPCC BY HEALTH STATUS AND OTHER ENROLLEE FACTORS-
 Subsection (a)(1)(B) of such section is amended by striking `age, disability
 status, and such other factors' and inserting `age, sex, disability status,
 enrollee type, and other factors relating to health status'.
 (c) RESTRICTING COVERAGE TO QUALIFIED HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS-
 Subsection (b) of such section is amended by striking `which--' and all
 that follows through the end and inserting `which is a qualified health
 maintenance organization (as defined in section 1310(d) of the Public
 Health Service Act).'.
 (d) SCOPE OF COVERAGE- Such section is further amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1)(A)--
 (A) by striking `-- (i)',
 (B) by striking `and enrolled under part B', and
 (C) by striking `, and (ii)' and all that follows through `part B only';
 (2) in subsection (a)(4), by striking `part A and B, or part B only'
 and inserting `part A' each place it appears;
 (3) in subsection (c)(2), by striking the dash and all that follows through
 `only under such part,' and inserting `only those services covered under
 part';
 (4) in subsection (d), by striking `or enrolled under part B only';
 (5) in subsection (e)(1)--
 (A) by striking `-- (A)',
 (B) by striking `(with respect to services' the first place it appears
 and all that follows through `and enrolled under part B only', and
 (C) by striking `and enrolled under part B, or enrolled under part B only,
 respectively,';
 (6) in subsection (e)(2), by striking `under parts A and B of this title'
 and inserting `under part A'; and
 (7) in subsection (g)(2)--
 (A) by striking `-- (A)',
 (B) by striking `under parts A and B' and inserting `under part A',
 (C) by striking `and enrolled in part B',
 (D) by striking `, or (B)' and all that follows through `benefits under
 part B only', and
 (E) by striking `and enrolled in part B, or enrolled in part B only,
 respectively,' each place it appears.
 (e) CAMPAIGN TO ENCOURAGE USE OF HMOS AND PROVISION OF SIDE-BY-SIDE
 COMPARISONS- Such section is further amended by adding at the end the
 following new subsection:
 `(j)(1) The USHealth Board shall conduct a national campaign to encourage
 eligible individuals to elect to enroll with eligible organizations under
 this section.
 `(2) The USHealth Board shall make available, to eligible individuals,
 in each geographic region in which eligible organizations offer enrollment
 under this section, a brochure that compares the benefits available through
 such organizations under this section (including information on covered
 services, beneficiary cost and other factors affecting the quality of
 or access to health care services) with the benefits otherwise available
 under this title.'.
 (f) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- Such section is further amended--
 (1) in subsection (a)(1)(A), by striking `and the term `reasonable' and
 all that follows through `subsection (h)',
 (2) by striking paragraph (2) of subsection (a), and
 (3) by striking subsections (f) and (h).
 (g) EFFECTIVE DATES- (1) The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply
 to payments for months beginning with January of the 2nd year beginning
 after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (2) The amendments made by subsections (c), (d), and (f) apply to contracts
 entered into or renewed on or after January 1 of the 2nd year beginning
 after the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (3) The amendment made by subsection (e) shall take effect on January 1
 of the 2nd year beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 415. SPECIAL RULES FOR FRAIL ELDERLY DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS AND SIMILAR
PROJECTS.
 Title XVIII of the Social Security Act is amended by inserting after
 section 1876 the following new section:
`TREATMENT OF FRAIL ELDERLY DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS AND SIMILAR PROJECTS
 `SEC. 1876A. (a) IN GENERAL-
 `(1) COMPREHENSIVE CAPITATION PAYMENTS- The USHealth Board shall establish
 special procedures under which projects described in subsection (b)
 receive payment on a capitated basis in return for the provision of care
 and services described in parts A and B to special populations (such as
 frail elderly individuals) in a managed care plan.
 `(2) WAIVER OF ASSESSMENT AND CASE MANAGEMENT FUNCTIONS- In the case of such
 a project, the USHealth Board shall waive such requirements of part B of this
 title relating to assessment and case management functions for individuals
 served by the project as would be duplicative of functions conducted under
 the project and unnecessary in order to assure the quality of care.
 `(b) PROJECTS COVERED- The projects described in this subsection are--
 `(1) frail elderly demonstration projects identified or established under
 section 603 of the Social Security Amendments of 1983, section 9412 of the
 Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1986, or section 4744 of the Omnibus
 Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990; or
 `(2) such other projects as the USHealth Board identifies as providing
 (A) comprehensive services (including long-term care services) to special
 populations and (B) comprehensive case management and assessment as an
 integral part of the provision of such services.'.
TITLE V--QUALITY ASSURANCE AND COST CONTAINMENT
Subtitle A--Quality Assurance
SEC. 501. EMPHASIS BY PEER REVIEW ORGANIZATIONS ON QUALITY ASSURANCE.
 (a) MAJOR EFFORT ON QUALITY ASSURANCE- Section 1153(c) of the Social
 Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1320c-2(c)) is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (7),
 (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (8) and inserting `;
 and', and
 (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(9) the organization must devote a major effort under the contract on
 quality assurance activities.'.
 (b) REQUIRING QUALITY ASSURANCE FOR ALL TYPES OF SERVICES- The third
 sentence of section 1154(a)(4)(A) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1320c-3(a)(4)(A))
 is amended by striking `quality of services' and inserting `quality of all
 the different types of health and long-term care (including services of
 all health care providers, as defined in section 1165(c)) whether payment
 may be made (in whole or in part) under title XVIII or through a private
 payor, coordinate these activities with the quality assurance activities
 of other entities, and'.
 (c) REQUIRING COMPOSITION OF PRO'S TO REFLECT TYPES OF SERVICES REVIEWED-
 Section 1152 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1320c-1) is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (2),
 (2) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (4), and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following new paragraph:
 `(3) includes in its composition and on its governing body representatives
 of other individuals responsible for the provision of services and items
 for which the organization is responsible for conducting quality assurance
 activities under section 1154(a)(4)(A); and'.
 (d) PROVIDING INFORMATION TO PRO'S TO CONDUCT ACTIVITIES- Section 1153 of
 such Act is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(j) The USHealth Administrator shall provide each utilization and quality
 control peer review organization with such information as may be necessary
 for the organization to carry out subsection (c)(10).'.
 (e) FUNDING OF INCREASED ACTIVITIES- Section 1159 of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 1320c-8) is amended--
 (1) by inserting `(a)' after `1159.', and
 (2) by adding at the end the following new subsections:
 `(b)(1) In addition to any other amounts appropriated to carry out this
 part but subject to subsection (e), there are appropriated to carry out this
 part from the funds in the USHealth Program Trust Fund (under section 1817)--
 `(A) for the fiscal year beginning in the first year after the date of
 the enactment of this subsection, an amount equal to 50 percent of the
 hospital payment amounts (as defined in paragraph (3)) for that year,
 `(B) for the fiscal year beginning in the 2nd year after the date of the
 enactment of this subsection, an amount equal to 65 percent of the hospital
 payment amounts for that year,
 `(C) for the fiscal year beginning in the 3rd year after the date of the
 enactment of this subsection, an amount equal to 75 percent of the hospital
 payment amounts for that year, and
 `(D) for each subsequent fiscal year, such an amount (not less than the
 amount described in subparagraph (C)) as the USHealth Board determines
 to be necessary to conduct the required reviews for all types of covered
 services and for all covered beneficiaries.
 `(2) The USHealth Administrator shall provide for the distribution of
 the amounts appropriated under paragraph (1) to the utilization and
 quality control peer review organizations with contracts under this part
 in reasonable proportion to each organization's expenses under this part
 which are not otherwise covered under section 1886(a)(1)(G) and which are
 attributable to activities with respect to health care services (including
 long-term care services) furnished under title XVIII.
 `(3) In paragraph (1), the term `hospital payment amounts' means, with
 respect to a utilization and quality control peer review organization for
 a fiscal year, the aggregate amounts payable to the organization under
 section 1866(a)(1)(G) for the fiscal year.
 `(c)(1) Notwithstanding subsection (b), to the extent that the USHealth
 Board determines that including review activities of services furnished
 other than under this Act provides for increased efficiency of operation
 of utilization and quality control peer review organizations, the Board
 may provide that up to 25 percent of the amounts otherwise appropriated
 under such subsections shall be withheld.
 `(2) In the case of a State with a quality assurance and utilization
 control plan approved by the USHealth Administrator, the amounts otherwise
 appropriated under this section to utilization and quality control peer
 review organizations for activities in that State shall be made available
 to that State for operation of its plan instead of to such organizations.'.
 (f) EFFECTIVE DATE- (1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendments
 made by this section shall apply to contracts entered into on or after
 January 1 of the first year beginning after the date of the enactment of
 this Act.
 (2) The USHealth Board shall provide for the initial implementation of the
 amendments made by subsection (e) by January 1 of the first year beginning
 after the date of the enactment of this Act, with such amendments becoming
 fully operational on January 1 of the following year.
SEC. 502. LICENSURE AND CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENT.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1862 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395y)
 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(j)(1) No payment may be made under this title for services of a health
 care provider (as defined in paragraph (2)) unless the provider is duly
 licensed and certified by the State, pursuant to procedures established
 by the USHealth Board by regulation.
 `(2) In paragraph (1), the term `health care provider' includes--
 `(A) hospitals, nursing facilities, and other institutional providers of
 health care,
 `(B) hospice programs, home health agencies, and other organized providers
 of long-term or respite care, and
 `(C) free-standing providers of health care, including ambulatory surgical
 centers, cancer treatment centers, alcohol and drug abuse treatment
 centers, ambulatory psychiatric centers, diagnostic imaging centers,
 independent clinical laboratories, comprehensive rehabilitation centers,
 and ambulatory cardiac catherization laboratories.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect
 for services furnished on or after January 1 of the 2nd year beginning
 after the date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 503. QUALITY ASSURANCE BOARDS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Title XI of the Social Security Act is amended by adding
 at the end the following new section:
`QUALITY ASSURANCE BOARDS
 `SEC. 1165. (a) ESTABLISHMENT- Each utilization and quality control peer
 review organization shall establish and appoint members to a quality
 assurance board (each such board referred to in this section as a `QAB')
 that will monitor the quality of care provided under title XVIII in the
 area served by the organization, pursuant to procedures established by
 the USHealth Board by regulation.
 `(b) DUTIES- Each QAB shall--
 `(1) coordinate all quality assurance activities effecting health care
 providers;
 `(2) at appropriate intervals assure that in the area served by the QAB
 licensure and certification requirements of law are enforced for all
 health care providers and that appropriate quality assurance and peer
 review procedures are enforced;
 `(3) utilize quality measure and cost-effective outcome guidelines consistent
 with practice guidelines developed by the Agency for Health Care Policy
 and Research; and
 `(4) perform such other quality assurance activities as the peer review
 organization specifies.
 `(c) HEALTH CARE PROVIDER DEFINED- In this section, the term `health care
 provider' includes--
 `(1) hospitals, nursing facilities, and other institutional providers of
 health care,
 `(2) hospice programs, home health agencies, and other organized providers
 of long-term or respite care, and
 `(3) free-standing providers of health care, including ambulatory surgical
 centers, cancer treatment centers, alcohol and drug abuse treatment
 centers, ambulatory psychiatric centers, diagnostic imaging centers,
 independent clinical laboratories, comprehensive rehabilitation centers,
 and ambulatory cardiac catherization laboratories.'.
SEC. 504. CONSUMERS' BILL OF RIGHTS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Title XVIII of the Social Security Act is amended by
 inserting after section 1892 the following new section:
`CONSUMERS' BILL OF RIGHTS
 `SEC. 1893. The USHealth Board shall promulgate, by regulation, a consumers'
 bill of rights, which shall recognize the following as rights of consumers
 which may be asserted by the consumer or his or her representative or
 guardian:
 `(1) TREATMENT OF INDIVIDUAL- To be treated with courtesy, respect, and
 full recognition of one's dignity, individuality, and right to control
 one's own household and lifestyle.
 `(2) FULL INFORMATION- To be fully and promptly informed orally and in
 writing--
 `(A) of services to be provided and any limits regarding availability of
 services from the agency or provider;
 `(B) whether services may be provided under this title or are covered by
 other sources;
 `(C) regarding charges for services and billing procedures, including an
 itemized copy of each bill submitted;
 `(D) of changes in services or charges;
 `(E) the procedures to follow if rights are violated or services are not
 satisfactory, including the right to a hearing; and
 `(F) in the case of home and community-based services, to be fully informed
 by the individual's case management team of his or her condition.
 `(3) COMPLIANCE WITH AGREEMENTS- To receive treatment, care, and services
 consistent with agreements between the provider and USHealth Program and
 between the provider and the consumer.
 `(4) PLANS OF CARE- To take an active part in creating and changing the
 plan of care.
 `(5) PARTICIPATION IN TREATMENT- To take an active part in selecting the
 provider and in selecting and evaluating treatment, care, and services.
 `(6) SERVICE BY QUALIFIED INDIVIDUALS- To be served by individuals who
 are properly trained and competent to perform their duties.
 `(7) FULL INFORMATION- To be fully informed by a provider of the provider's
 assessment of the consumer's condition.
 `(8) REFUSAL OF TREATMENT- To refuse all or part of any treatment, care,
 or service, and to be informed of the likely consequences of such refusal.
 `(9) NONDISCRIMINATION- To receive treatment, care, and services
 in compliance with all State and local laws and regulations without
 discrimination in the provision or quality of services based on race,
 religion, gender, age, or creed (except as provided under the Age
 Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6101 et seq.)) or because of a change
 in the source of payment.
 `(10) FREEDOM FROM ABUSE- To be free from mental and physical abuse, neglect,
 and exploitation, and to be free from chemical and physical restraints except
 as authorized in writing by a physician for a specified period of time.
 `(11) RESPECT AND PRIVACY- To receive respect and privacy in the
 consumer's treatment, care, and services in caring for personal needs,
 in communications, and in all daily activities.
 `(12) PROPERTY- To be assured respect for the consumer's property rights.
 `(13) CONFIDENTIALITY- To be assured confidential treatment of personal
 financial and medical records and to approve or refuse their release to
 any individuals outside the agency except as otherwise required by law or
 third-party payment contract.
 `(14) GRIEVANCE RIGHTS- To voice grievances and recommend changes in policies
 and services to staff or outside representatives of his or her choice and
 to be assisted in doing so when assistance is needed, free from restraint,
 interference, coercion, discrimination, or reprisal by the provider.
 `(15) EXERCISE OF RIGHTS- To be free to fully exercise his or her civil
 rights and to be assisted in doing so when assistance is needed.
 `(16) INFORMATION ON SERVICES- To be promptly notified of acceptance or
 denial of services and the reasons for such denial.
 `(17) INFORMATION ON CHANGES IN SERVICES- To receive promptly written
 notice if treatment, care or services are to be reduced or terminated,
 and assistance to assure a smooth transition in services consistent with
 the welfare of the homecare consumer.
 `(18) TRANSITION OF HOME AND COMMUNITY-BASED SERVICES- To receive assistance
 to assure a smooth transition in services consistent with the welfare of
 the home care consumer.'.
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect
 on January 1 of the first year beginning after the date of the enactment
 of this Act.
SEC. 505. ADDITIONAL QUALITY ASSURANCE PROVISIONS FOR LONG-TERM CARE.
 For additional quality assurance provisions relating to long-term care,
 see section 1839 of the Social Security Act, as inserted by section 201
 of this Act.
SEC. 506. HOSPITAL DISCHARGE PLANNING PROCESS.
 (a) DISCHARGE PLANNING PROCESS- Subsection (ee) of section 1861 of the
 Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395x) is amended to read as follows:
`Discharge Planning Process
 `(ee)(1) A discharge planning process of a hospital shall be considered
 sufficient if it is applicable to services furnished by the hospital to
 individuals entitled to insurance benefits under this title and if it
 meets the guidelines and standards established by the USHealth Board under
 paragraph (2).
 `(2) The USHealth Board shall develop, in conjunction with the Quality
 Assurance Boards, guidelines and standards for the discharge planning process
 in order to protect against inappropriately early hospital discharges and
 to ensure a timely and smooth transition to the most appropriate type of
 and setting for post-hospital care. The guidelines and standards shall
 include the following:
 `(A) Using protocols and screens to permit the early identification of
 patients likely to need post-hospital care and to permit the identification
 of patients at risk of premature discharge from a hospital.
 `(B) Patient and family education and involvement in identifying their
 options and post-hospital benefits available under this title, on their
 rights of appeal with respect to coverage under this title, and on
 appropriate techniques for self-care.
 `(C) Providing psychosocial and physical assessments and counseling of
 patients and families in determining patients' post-hospital needs.
 `(D) The development, beginning as close to the time of a patient's admission
 to the hospital as appropriate, of a discharge plan in consultation with
 the patient and family and all relevant health care professionals.
 `(E) Alerting appropriate skilled nursing facilities and home health
 agencies of a patient's anticipated need for post-hospital care at the
 earliest possible time.
 `(F) Assigning responsibility for the development and implementation of
 a discharge plan within the hospital, during the transfer of a patient to
 post-hospital care and inpatient followup after discharge.'.
 (b) MONITORING BY PEER REVIEW ORGANIZATIONS OF HOSPITAL COMPLIANCE WITH
 DISCHARGE PLANNING PROCESS- Section 1154(a) of the Social Security Act
 (42 U.S.C. 1320c-3(a)), as amended by section 413(a) of this Act, is
 further amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(18) The organization shall monitor hospitals' compliance with the
 discharge planning process requirements specified in section 1861(ee).'.
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The requirements of section 1861(ee) of the Social
 Security Act, as amended by subsection (b), shall apply to patients
 discharged on or after January 1 of the first year beginning after the
 date of the enactment of this Act.
SEC. 507. ASSURING PRE-PAID ORGANIZATIONS PROVIDE QUALITY, ACCESSIBLE MENTAL
HEALTH SERVICES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Section 1876(c) of the Social Security Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395mm(c)) is amended by inserting `(including outpatient mental
 health services)' after `services' the first place it appears in paragraphs
 (4)(A) and (6).
 (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall be effective
 for services provided on or after January 1 of the first year beginning
 after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Subtitle B--Cost Containment
SEC. 511. SPECIFICATION OF OVERALL HEALTH CARE SPENDING AMOUNTS; ADJUSTMENT
OF PAYMENT RATES.
 (a) IN GENERAL- Part D of the Social Security Act, as inserted by section
 401(a) of this Act, is amended by adding at the end the following new
 section:
`LIMITING OVERALL HEALTH CARE SPENDING; ADJUSTMENT OF PAYMENT RATES
 `SEC. 1855. (a) Specification of Overall Health Care Spending Amounts-
 `(1) AMOUNT- With respect to each year (beginning with of the second year
 beginning after the date of the enactment of the USHealth Program Act of
 1991), for purposes of this section, the overall health care spending amount
 (specified under this subsection) is the product of--
 `(A) the average per capita health care expenditures (identified in
 paragraph (3)) in previous year, as estimated by the USHealth Board,
 increased by the applicable percentage increase for the year involved
 (specified in paragraph (2)), and
 `(B) the population of the United States, as projected by the Secretary
 of Commerce as of July 1 of the year involved.
 `(2) APPLICABLE PERCENTAGE INCREASE-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in paragraph (2), the applicable
 percentage increase for each year is the percentage increase in the gross
 national product (in current dollars) from the 1st quarter of the second
 previous year to the 1st quarter of the previous year.
 `(B) ADJUSTMENT TO ASSURE ADEQUATE SERVICES- The USHealth Board may increase
 the applicable percentage increase otherwise applicable for a year if the
 Board determines that adequate health care services could not be provided
 under this title and under qualified employer health plans without such
 an increase.
 `(3) SERVICES COVERED- The average per capita health care expenditures
 shall be based on the expenditures (including expenditures for deductibles
 and coinsurance) for services covered under this title expended in the
 United States.
 `(b) Allocation of Overall Spending and Adjustment of Payment Rates by
 Class of Provider-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Each year, within the overall health care spending
 amount specified under subsection (a), the USHealth Board shall conduct
 negotiations with professional and other associations representing the
 classes of health care providers in order to distribute such amount among
 the different classes of providers (as defined in paragraph (3)). The
 USHealth Board shall report to the Congress, by not later than September
 1st before the year, on the results of such negotiations, and shall specify
 the dollar amounts, within the overall amount specified under subsection
 (a), that each class of provider will be allocated for that year.
 `(2) ADJUSTMENT OF PAYMENT RATES- Notwithstanding any other provision of
 this title, the USHealth Board shall adjust, for each class of provider
 for each year, the payment rates for services covered under this title
 otherwise established so that, if applied in the aggregate by all qualified
 employer health plans and under this title during the year, would result
 in total expenditures that are equal to the allocation for each class of
 provider under paragraph (1).
 `(3) CLASS OF PROVIDER DEFINED- In this subsection, the term `class of
 provider' means hospitals, physicians, and such other classes of health
 care providers as the USHealth Board specifies in regulations.'.
TITLE VI--FINANCING
SEC. 601. PREMIUMS; COLLECTION OF PREMIUMS.
 (a) PREMIUMS- Part A of title XVIII of the Social Security Act, as
 previously amended by this Act, is amended by inserting after section 1819
 the following new section:
`AMOUNTS OF PREMIUMS
 `SEC. 1820. (a) BENEFICIARY PREMIUMS-
 `(1) AMOUNT OF PREMIUMS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in this section and subject to part
 C (relating to low-income assistance), the premium to be charged for
 enrollment under this part on a non-employment basis of any individual
 in a beneficiary class (as defined in subsection (d)) in any community
 (as defined in subsection (e)) is the actuarial rate established under
 paragraph (2) with respect to such class and community.
 `(B) PART-TIME EMPLOYEES AND SEASONAL OR TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES-
 `(i) IN GENERAL- Subject to clause (iii), in the case of an individual
 who is a covered employee (as defined in clause (ii)), the premium to be
 charged for enrollment under this part on a non-employment basis is--
 `(I) the beneficiary actuarial rate otherwise applicable under subparagraph
 (A), less the amount of the contributions of all the employers with respect
 to that employee, or
 `(II) 20 percent of such beneficiary actuarial rate,
whichever is greater.
 `(ii) COVERED EMPLOYEE DEFINED- In clause (i), the term `covered employee'
 means an individual who--
 `(I) is employed by one or more employers as a part-time employee or as
 a seasonal or temporary employee, and
 `(II) none of whose employers has elected to meet the requirements of
 part A of title XXI with respect to part-time employees or seasonal or
 temporary employees, respectively, through enrollment under a qualified
 employer health plan, but all of whom are required to provide a contribution
 towards the employee's premiums under this part,
and includes the family members of such an employee.
 `(iii) LIMIT ON PREMIUM WHERE PREMIUM SUBSIDY- In no case shall the premium
 under clause (i) exceed--
 `(I) the beneficiary actuarial rate otherwise applicable under subparagraph
 (A), reduced by
 `(II) the amount of any premium subsidy under part C.
 `(2) DETERMINATION OF ACTUARIAL RATES-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- In September of each year, beginning with the first year
 beginning after the date of the enactment of this title, the USHealth
 Board shall determine and publish the beneficiary actuarial rate for each
 beneficiary class (as specified in subsection (d)) available under this
 title for each community (designated under subsection (e)) for health
 insurance benefits in the following year.
 `(B) BASIS FOR ACTUARIAL RATES- Each such actuarial rate shall be established
 in a manner so that if all eligible individuals in the class were enrolled
 under this title for the benefit package in the community, the aggregate of
 the rates would be equal to the total expenditures (including administrative
 expenses) with respect to that class and community under this title in
 that following year. Each such actuarial rate shall be uniform within each
 beneficiary class and community, and shall not vary among such individuals
 by age, sex, health, or other risk characteristics.
 `(C) PUBLIC STATEMENT- Whenever the Board publishes beneficiary actuarial
 rates under this paragraph, the Board shall, at the time of such publication,
 include a public statement setting forth the actuarial assumptions and
 bases employed in arriving at the amount of the actuarial rates.
 `(3) NO JUDICIAL OR ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW- There shall be no administrative
 or judicial review of the actuarial rates determined under this subsection.
 `(b) EMPLOYER PREMIUMS-
 `(1) AMOUNT OF PREMIUMS-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- The employer premium to be charged an employer for
 enrollment of full-time employees (and their families) on an employment
 basis under this part in a year is the sum (for all such employees) of--
 `(i) subject to subparagraph (B), 80 percent of the employer actuarial rate
 (established under paragraph (2)) for the beneficiary class and community
 with respect to each such employee, and
 `(ii) subject to subparagraph (C), the maximum amount of premiums which
 may be charged by the employer under title XXI for required services.
 `(B) LIMIT ON EMPLOYER PAYMENTS- The amount of the employer payment under
 subparagraph (A)(i) shall not exceed 7 percent of the wages paid with
 respect to all full-time employees (and their families) so enrolled.
 `(C) TREATMENT OF CERTAIN PREMIUM SUBSIDIES- If the employer is receiving
 premium subsidies on behalf of certain employees under part C, the amount
 of the employer payment under subparagraph (A)(ii) shall be reduced by
 the amount of such premium subsidies.
 `(D) CONSTRUCTION- Nothing in this subsection prevents an employer from
 making contributions on behalf of the enrollment on a non-employment basis
 of employees (and their families) during the period beginning with the
 2nd year that begins after the date of the enactment of this section and
 ending with the year before the year in which the employer is required to
 enroll employees in a qualified employer health plan.
 `(2) Employer actuarial rates-
 `(A) IN GENERAL- In September of each year (beginning with the first year
 beginning after the date of the enactment of this section), the USHealth
 Board shall determine and publish the employer actuarial rate for each
 beneficiary class for each community (designated under subsection (e))
 for benefits in the following year.
 `(B) BASIS FOR ACTUARIAL RATES- Each such actuarial rate shall be established
 in a manner so that if all individuals in the class were employed full-time
 by an employer of any size (or were family members of such an employee)
 were enrolled under this part in the community, the aggregate of the
 rates would be equal to the total expenditures (including administrative
 expenses) under this part for that population with respect to that class
 and community in that following year. Each such actuarial rate shall be
 uniform within each beneficiary class and community and shall not vary
 among such individuals by age, sex, health, or other risk characteristics.
 `(C) TRANSITION- In applying subparagraph (B)--
 `(i) for the determination made in the first year after the date of the
 enactment of this section, the determination under such subparagraph shall
 be based only on the population of individuals that are full-time employees
 (or family members of such employees) of large employers, or
 `(ii) for the determination made in the 2nd year after the date of the
 enactment of this section, the determination under such subparagraph
 shall be based only on the population of individuals that are full-time
 employees (or family members of such employees) of employers that are
 large or medium-size employers.
 `(D) PUBLIC STATEMENT- Whenever the USHealth Board publishes employer
 actuarial rates under this paragraph, the Board shall, at the time of
 such publication, include a public statement setting forth the actuarial
 assumptions and bases employed in arriving at the amount of the actuarial
 rates.
 `(3) NO JUDICIAL OR ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW- There shall be no administrative
 or judicial review of the employer premium percentage determined under
 this subsection.
 `(c) PREMIUMS FOR AGED AND DISABLED BENEFICIARIES-
 `(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to part C (relating to low-income assistance),
 in the case of an aged or disabled beneficiary (as defined in paragraph
 (4)) who is enrolled under this part on a non-employment basis, the monthly
 premium shall be the amount specified in paragraph (2).
 `(2) Premium amount-
 `(A) EARLY YEARS- The monthly premium for each month in--
 `(i) 1991 shall be $29.90,
 `(ii) 1992 shall be $31.80,
 `(iii) 1993 shall be $36.60,
 `(iv) 1994 shall be $41.10, and
 `(v) 1995 shall be $46.10.
 `(B) LATER YEARS- The monthly premium for each month in a succeeding year
 is equal to the monthly premium for months in the preceding year increased
 by a percentage equal to the applicable increase percentage (as defined in
 section 215(i)) that becomes effective for months in that succeeding year. If
 any monthly premium determined under this subparagraph is not a multiple of
 10 cents, such premium shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of 10 cents.
 `(3) HOLD HARMLESS- For any calendar quarter, if an aged or disabled
 beneficiary is entitled to monthly benefits under section 202 or 223 or to a
 monthly annuity under section 3(a), 4(a), or 4(f) of the Railroad Retirement
 Act of 1974 for November and December of the preceding year, and if the
 monthly premium of the beneficiary under this section for December and
 for January is deducted from those benefits under this part, the monthly
 premium otherwise determined under this subsection for an individual for
 that year shall not be increased, pursuant to this subsection, to the
 extent that such increase would reduce the amount of benefits payable to
 that individual for that December below the amount of benefits payable to
 that individual for that November (after the deduction of the premium under
 this subsection). For purposes of this paragraph, retroactive adjustments or
 payments and deductions on account of work shall not be taken into account
 in determining the monthly benefits to which an individual is entitled
 under section 202 or 223 or under the Railroad Retirement Act of 1974.
 `(4) AGED OR DISABLED BENEFICIARY DEFINED- In this subsection, the term
 `aged or disabled beneficiary' means an individual entitled to benefits
 under this part on a nonemployment basis and who, under the law in effect
 before the date of the enactment of the USHealth Program Act of 1991,
 would have been eligible to enroll for benefits under part B of this title
 (as in effect before such date).
 `(d) BENEFICIARY CLASSES- For purposes of this section, the beneficiary
 classes are as follows:
 `(1) 1 adult.
 `(2) A married couple without children.
 `(3) 1 adult and 1 child.
 `(4) A married couple with 1 or more children, or 1 adult with 2 or more
 children.
 `(e) COMMUNITY- For purposes of this section, the term `community' means
 a geographic area designated by the USHealth Board as--
 `(1) encompassing one or more adjacent metropolitan statistical areas, or
 `(2) the remaining area within each State (that is not designated within
 any community under paragraph (1));
except that the Board may designate an entire State as a community if such
a designation would better carry out the purposes of this title and title
XXVII of the Public Health Service Act. The Board from time to time may
change the boundaries of communities designated under paragraph (1) or (2)
for such purposes. There shall be no administrative or judicial review of
the designation of communities under this subsection.'.
 (b) COLLECTION OF PREMIUMS- Section 1840 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395s)
 is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by adding at the end the following new sentence:
 `Such regulations shall be prescribed only after consultation with the
 USHealth Board.';
 (2) by striking `Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance' each place it
 appears and inserting `USHealth Program';
 (3) in subsection (c), by striking `may' and inserting `shall';
 (4) in subsection (e)--
 (A) by inserting `(1)(A)' after `(e)', and
 (B) by adding at the end the following: `In the case of individuals enrolled
 on a non-employment basis under this part, the USHealth Board shall
 provide for the payment of premiums on a monthly or quarterly basis. To
 the maximum extent feasible, the Board shall arrange for payment of such
 premiums through automatic withholding from income sources or accounts
 with financial institutions.
 `(B) In the case of premium amounts owing and unpaid under this subsection,
 the Board shall inform the Secretary of the Treasury of individuals or
 individuals owing such amounts and the amounts owed. The Secretary of the
 Treasury shall assess and collect the amounts referred to in the previous
 sentence in the same manner as taxes imposed by subtitle C of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986.
 `(2)(A) In the case of individuals enrolled under this part on an employment
 basis, the employer shall provide for periodic payments of premiums to the
 USHealth Board in a form, manner, and time established by the Board. Such
 frequency may vary based on the number of full-time employees covered and
 the amount of premiums due.
 `(B) In the case of premium amounts owing and unpaid under this paragraph,
 the Board shall inform the Secretary of the Treasury of employers owing such
 amounts and the amounts owed. The Secretary of the Treasury shall assess and
 collect the amounts referred to in the previous sentence in the same manner
 as taxes imposed by subtitle C of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.'; and
 (5) by being redesignated as section 1820A and being transferred and
 inserted after section 1820.
 (c) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- Section 1843 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395v)
 is repealed.
SEC. 602. ELIMINATION OF LIMIT ON WAGES OR SELF-EMPLOYMENT INCOME SUBJECT
TO FICA AND RAILROAD RETIREMENT TAXES.
 (a) IN GENERAL-
 (1) EMPLOYERS AND EMPLOYEES- Section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986 (relating to wages) is amended by striking paragraph (1).
 (2) SELF-EMPLOYMENT INCOME- Section 1402(b) of such Code is amended by
 striking paragraph (1).
 (3) RAILROAD RETIREMENT TAXES- Section 3231(e) of such Code is amended by
 striking paragraph (2).
 (b) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS-
 (1) Section 201(a) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 401(a)) is amended
 by adding at the end the following new sentence: `Notwithstanding the
 previous provisions of this subsection or the provisions of subsection
 (b), whenever in this subsection or subsection (b) a reference is made to
 the taxes imposed by chapter 21 or chapter 2 of the Internal Revenue Code
 of 1986 with respect to wages or self-employment income, such reference
 shall not include taxes imposed as a result of the amendments made by
 section 601 of the USHealth Act of 1991.'.
 (2) Section 230(c) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 430(c)) is amended
 by striking `and sections 1402, 3121, 3122, 3125, 6413, and 6654 of the
 Internal Revenue Code of 1954'.
 (3) Section 1402 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by
 striking subsection (k).
 (4) Section 3231(e)(2)(B) of such Code is amended by striking clause (i).
 (5) Section 3122 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking
 the second sentence.
 (6) Section 3125 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking
 the second sentences in each of subsections (a), (b), (c), and (d).
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply with
 respect to remuneration paid on or after January 1 of the first year
 beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act and with respect
 to earnings from self-employment attributable to taxable years beginning
 after such date.
SEC. 603. INCREASE IN HEALTH INSURANCE TAX RATE.
 (a) EMPLOYER AND EMPLOYEE TAXES- Sections 3101 and 3111 of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986 are each amended--
 (1) by striking `HOSPITAL' and inserting `USHEALTH',
 (2) by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (5),
 (3) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (6) and inserting `;
 and', and
 (4) by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
 `(7) with respect to wages received on or after January 1 of the 3rd year
 beginning after the date of the enactment of the USHealth Program Act of
 1991, the rate shall be 1.80 percent.'
 (b) SELF-EMPLOYMENT TAXES- Section 1401(b) of such Code is amended--
 (1) by striking `HOSPITAL' and inserting `USHEALTH', and
 (2) by striking the last line and inserting the following:
 `December 31, 1985.......January 1, 1994
2.90
 `December 31, 1993
3.60.'
 (c) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section shall apply with
 respect to remuneration paid on or after January 1 of the 3rd year beginning
 after the date of the enactment of this Act and with respect to earnings
 from self-employment attributable to taxable years beginning after such date.
SEC. 604. STATE MAINTENANCE OF EFFORT PAYMENTS.
 (a) CONDITION OF CONTINUED FEDERAL PAYMENTS- Notwithstanding any other
 provision of the Social Security Act, as a condition of payment to a State
 for a calendar quarter beginning on or after January 1 of the 2nd year
 beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act under title IV, V,
 XIX, or XX of the Social Security Act, the State must provide (in a manner
 and at a time specified by the USHealth Board) for payment to the USHealth
 Program Trust Fund (under section 1817 of such Act) of the amount specified
 in subsection (b) for the quarter.
 (b) MAINTENANCE OF EFFORT AMOUNT-
 (1) IN GENERAL- The amount of payment specified in this subsection for a
 State for a calendar quarter is equal to the State hypothetical savings
 specified in paragraph (2) for the quarter increased by the compounded
 sum of the increase in the consumer price index for all urban consumers
 (U.S. City average, as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the
 Department of Labor) for each year after 1991 and through the year before
 the year in which the quarter occurs.
 (2) STATE SAVINGS- A State hypothetical savings specified in this paragraph
 for a calendar quarter is 1/4 of the amount by which the payments (net
 of Federal payments) made by a State under its State plan under title XIX
 of the Social Security Act for fiscal year 1991 for medical assistance
 would have been reduced if the law (as amended by this Act and in effect
 during such quarter) has been in effect during all of fiscal year 1991.
 (c) STATE DEFINED- In this section, the term `State' includes the District
 of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and
 the Northern Mariana Islands.
SEC. 605. USHEALTH PROGRAM TRUST FUND.
 (a) REDESIGNATION OF FEDERAL HOSPITAL INSURANCE TRUST FUND- Section 1817
 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i) is amended--
 (1) by amending its heading to read as follows:
`USHEALTH PROGRAM TRUST FUND';
 (2) in subsection (a), by striking `Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund'
 and inserting `USHealth Program Trust Fund';
 (3) in subsection (b)--
 (A) by striking `composed of the' and all that follows through `Senate'
 and inserting `composed of the USHealth Board',
 (B) by striking `The Secretary of the Treasury' and inserting `The chairman
 of the USHealth Board',
 (C) by striking `Administrator of the Health Care Financing Administration'
 and inserting `USHealth Administrator', and
 (D) by striking `Health Care Financing Administration' the second place
 it appears and inserting `USHealth Administration';
 (4) in subsection (h), by striking `Secretary of Health and Human Services'
 and inserting `USHealth Administrator'; and
 (5) by striking subsection (j).
 (b) INCORPORATION OF ADDITIONAL FUNDING SOURCES- Section 1817(a) of such
 Act is further amended--
 (1) by striking `or' at the end of paragraph (1),
 (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (2) and inserting a
 semicolon, and
 (3) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following new paragraph:
 `(3) the aggregate increase in tax liabilities attributable to the
 amendments made by section 602 of the USHealth Program Act of 1991, which
 are not otherwise attributable to sections 1402(b), 3101(b), and 3111(b)
 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986;
 `(4) the contributions of States made under section 604 of the USHealth
 Program Act of 1991;
 `(5) premiums paid for months on or after January 1994 under section
 1820; and
 `(6) an amount equivalent to the amounts that would have been provided
 under section 1844 (as such section was in effect before the date of the
 enactment of the USHealth Program Act of 1991).'.
 (c) OFF-BUDGET TREATMENT OF TRUST FUND- (1) Section 1817 of such Act is
 further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(k)(1) The receipts and disbursements of the Trust Fund, and the taxes
 imposed under sections 1401(b), 3101(b), and 3111(b) of the Internal
 Revenue Code of 1986, shall not be included in the totals of the budget
 of the United States Government as submitted by the President or of the
 Congressional budget and shall be exempt from any general budget limitation
 imposed by statute on expenditures and net lending (budget outlays) of
 the United States Government.
 `(2) No provision of law enacted after January 1, 1993 (other than a
 provision of an appropriation Act that appropriates funds authorized under
 this title as in effect on such date), may provide for payments from the
 general fund of the Treasury to the Trust Fund, or for payments from the
 Trust Fund to the general fund of the Treasury.'.
 (2) Section 710 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 911), as in effect for fiscal years
 beginning with fiscal year 1992, is amended--
 (A) by striking subsection (b), and
 (B) in subsection (a)--
 (i) by striking `(a)', and
 (ii) by striking `, the Federal Disability' and all that follows through
 `3111' and inserting `and the Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund and
 the taxes imposed under sections 1401(a), 3101(a), and 3111(a)'.
 (d) REPEAL OF FEDERAL SUPPLEMENTARY MEDICAL INSURANCE TRUST FUND-
 (1) IN GENERAL- Section 1841 of the Social Security Act is repealed.
 (2) TRANSFER OF FUNDS- Funds in, and obligations of, the Federal
 Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund shall become funds in, and
 obligations of, the USHealth Trust Fund as of January 1 of the 2nd year
 beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act, and any reference in
 any provision of law to such Trust Fund shall, as of such date, be deemed
 a reference to the USHealth Program Trust Fund.
 (e) REPEAL OF SEPARATE APPROPRIATIONS- Section 1844 of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 1395w) is repealed.
 (f) EXTENDING BORROWING AUTHORITY OF TRUST FUND- Section 1817(j) of such
 Act (42 U.S.C. 1395i(j)) is amended--
 (1) in paragraph (1), by striking `prior to January 1988', and
 (2) by amending subparagraph (C) of paragraph (1) to read as follows:
 `(C) The full amount of all loans made under paragraph (1) shall be repaid
 at the earliest feasible date.'.
 (g) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS- (1) Section 706 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 907)
 is amended--
 (A) in subsection (a), by striking `the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust
 Fund, and the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund' and
 inserting `the USHealth Program Trust Fund', and
 (B) in subsection (d), by inserting `and' at the end of paragraph (1),
 and by amending paragraphs (2) and (3) to read as follows:
 `(2) a separate report with respect to the USHealth Program under title
 XVIII.'.
 (2) Section 1159 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1320c-8) is amended by striking
 `from--' and all that follows through the end and inserting `from the
 USHealth Program Trust Fund.'.
 (3) Paragraph (5) of section 1876(a) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 1395mm(a))
 is amended to read as follows:
 `(5) The payment to an eligible organization under this section shall be
 made from the USHealth Program Trust Fund.'.
 (h) EFFECTIVE DATE- This section, and the amendments made by this section,
 shall take effect on January 1 of the 2nd year beginning after the date of
 the enactment of this Act, except that the amendments made by subsection
 (b) shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
 (i) TRANSITION- Any reference in any provision of law to the Federal
 Hospital Insurance Trust Fund is deemed, as of January 1 of the 2nd year
 beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act, to be a reference
 to the USHealth Program Trust Fund.
TITLE VII--RURAL AND CENTRAL CITY DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS AND EXPANSION OF
PRIMARY CARE AND PUBLIC HEALTH DELIVERY CAPACITY
SEC. 701. ADDITIONAL RURAL AND CENTRAL CITY HEALTH CARE RESEARCH AND
DEMONSTRATIONS.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The Administrator of the Health Care Financing Administration
 shall provide for additional research and demonstration projects into how
 title XVIII of the Social Security Act could be changed to better cover
 care for beneficiaries residing in rural areas and in central city areas
 of large cities.
 (b) ANNUAL REPORT- The Administrator shall report to Congress by not later
 than April 1 of each year (beginning with 1993) concerning the progress
 of the research and demonstration projects conducted under this section.
 (c) APPLICATION OF WAIVER PROVISIONS- The provisions of section 402(a)(2)
 of the Social Security Amendments of 1967 shall apply to demonstration
 projects conducted under this section in the same manner as they apply to
 demonstration projects conducted under section 402(a)(1) of such Act.
 (d) EFFECTIVE DATE- This section shall take effect on October 1, 1992.
 (e) SUBSTITUTING USHEALTH BOARD- Effective on the date of establishment of
 the USHealth Board, any reference in this section to the `Administrator'
 is deemed a reference to the USHealth Board.
SEC. 702. EXTENSION OF AUTHORIZATIONS FOR PRIMARY CARE AND PUBLIC HEALTH
PROGRAMS THROUGH THE YEAR 2000.
 (a) IMMUNIZATION PROGRAMS- Section 317(j)(1)(A) of the Public Health Service
 Act (42 U.S.C. 247b(j)(1)(A)) is amended by striking `1995' and inserting
 `2000'.
 (b) TUBERCULOSIS PREVENTION AND CONTROL- Section 317(j)(2) of such Act
 (42 U.S.C. 247b(j)(2)) is amended by striking `1995' and inserting `2000'.
 (c) LEAD POISONING PREVENTION- Section 317A(j) of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 247b-1(j)) is amended by adding before the period at the end the
 following: `and such sums as may be necessary for each succeeding fiscal
 year through fiscal year 2000'.
 (d) PROJECTS AND PROGRAMS FOR THE PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF SEXUALLY
 TRANSMITTED DISEASES- Section 318(d)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 247c(d)(1))
 is amended by striking `and 1991' and inserting `through 2000'.
 (e) MIGRANT HEALTH CENTERS- Section 329(h)(1)(A) of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 254b(h)(1)(A)) is amended by striking `1994' and inserting `2000'.
 (f) COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTERS- Section 330(g)(2)(A) of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 254c(g)(2)(A)) is amended by striking `1994' and inserting `2000'.
 (g) HOMELESS PROGRAMS- Section 340(q)(1) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 256(q)(1))
 is amended by striking `and 1994' and inserting `through 2000'.
 (h) PUBLIC HOUSING PROGRAMS- Section 340A(p)(1) of such Act (42
 U.S.C. 256a(p)(1)) is amended by striking `and 1993' and inserting
 `through 2000'.
 (i) FAMILY PLANNING SERVICES- Section 1001(d) of such Act (42 U.S.C. 300(d))
 is amended--
 (1) by striking `and' after `1984;', and
 (2) by inserting before the period at the end the following: `; and such
 sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 1992 through 2000'.
 (j) EARLY INTERVENTION SERVICES FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH HIV DISEASE- Section
 2655 of such Act (42 U.S.C. 300ff-55) is amended by striking `1995' and
 inserting `2000'.
 (k) NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE CORPS- For extension through the year 2000
 of the authorization of appropriations of funds for the National Health
 Service Corps, see the amendments made by section 108 of the National
 Health Service Corps Revitalization Amendments of 1990 (Public Law 101-597).
SEC. 703. EXPANDING PRIMARY CARE AND PUBLIC HEALTH DELIVERY CAPACITY.
 Section 1817 of the Social Security Act, as amended by section 605(c)(1)
 of this Act, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
 `(l)(1) From the amounts provided under paragraph (3) the USHealth Board
 shall make grants to public and nonprofit private entities for projects
 to plan and develop primary care centers and public health clinics which
 will serve medically underserved populations. The funds provided under
 such a grant may be used for the same purposes for which a grant may be
 made under section 330(c) of the Public Health Service Act.
 `(2) The provisions of subsection (e)(1) of section 330 of the Public
 Health Service Act shall apply to a grant under this subsection in the same
 manner as they apply to a grant under subsection (c) of such section. The
 provisions of subsection (g)(3) of such section shall apply to grants for
 projects to plan and develop primary care centers under this subsection
 in the same manner as they apply to grants under such section.
 `(3)(A) Expenditures, within the range specified in subparagraph (B),
 necessary to provide all grants under paragraph (1) in order to serve
 adequately medically underserved populations which are enrolled under this
 title or are receiving low-income assistance under part C, shall be made
 from the Trust Fund each fiscal year (before fiscal year 2001).
 `(B) The amount of expenditures under this subsection for any fiscal year
 shall be not less than 1/2 percent, or greater than 1 percent, of the
 amounts the USHealth Board estimates will be expended from the Trust Fund
 in the fiscal year for low-income assistance under part C.
 `(C) The funds provided under this subsection with respect to primary care
 centers and public health clinics are in addition to, and not in replacement
 of, funds made available to such centers and clinics under sections 317,
 317A, 318, 329, 330, 340, 340A, 1001, and 2655 of the Public Health Service
 Act or any other law.
 `(4) In this subsection:
 `(A) The term `primary care center' means--
 `(i) a migrant health center (as defined in section 329(a)(1) of the Public
 Health Service Act),
 `(ii) a community health center (as defined in section 330(a) of such
 Act), or
 `(iii) an entity qualified to receive a grant under section 340, 340A,
 1001, or 2655 of such Act.
 `(B) The term `public health clinic' means an entity qualified to receive
 a grant under section 317, 317A, or 318 of the Public Health Service Act.
 `(C) The term `medically underserved population' has the meaning given
 such term in section 330(b)(3) of the Public Health Service Act.'.
SEC. 704. ANNUAL REPORT ON IMPACT OF ACT IN MEETING GOALS AND OBJECTIVES
STATED IN `HEALTHY PEOPLE, 2000'.
 (a) IN GENERAL- The USHealth Board every 5 years, beginning with 1994,
 shall submit to Congress a report on the impact of this Act in meeting
 the following Goals for the Nation stated in `Healthy People, 2000' (and
 in meeting the specific national health promotion and disease prevention
 objectives stated in such report):
 (1) To increase the span of healthy life for Americans.
 (2) To reduce health disparities among Americans.
 (3) To achieve access to preventive services for all Americans.
 (b) RECOMMENDATIONS- Each report under subsection (a) shall include such
 recommendations with respect to changes in the benefits and payment policies
 under this Act as will best promote achievement of national health promotion
 and disease prevention goals and objectives.